Mario Puzo 

The Godfather 



First published in Great Britain 1922 
by William Heinemann Ltd 
PRINTED AT MACMILLAN INDIA PRESS, MADRAS 600 002 



For .Anthof^ Cleri 




Book I 


Behind every ff'eat fortune 
there is a crime. 


CHAPTER ONE 


Amerigo Bonasera sat in New York Criminal Court 
Number 3 and waited for justice; vengeance on the men who 
had so cruelly hurt his daughter, who had tried to dishonour her. 

The judge, a formidably heavy-featured man, rolled up the 
sleeves of his black robe as if to physically chastise the two 
young men standing before the bench. His face was cold with 
majestic contempt. But there was something fake in alfthis 
that Amerigo Bonasera sensed but did not yet understand. 

‘You acted like the worst kind of degenerates,* the judge 
said harshly. Yes, yes, thought Amerigo Bonasera. Animak. 
Animak. l^e two young men, glossy hair crew cut, scrubbed 
clean-cut faces composed into humble contrition, bowed their 
heads in submksion. 

^The judge went on. ‘You acted like wild beasts in a jungle 
and you are fortunate you did not sexually molest that poor 
girl or rd put you behind bars for twenty years.* The judge 
paused, his eyes beneath impressively thick brows flickered 
slyly towards the sallow-faced Amerigo Bonasera, then 
lowered to a stack of probation reports befdre him. He 
frowned and shrugged as if convinced against his own natural 
desire. He spoke again. 

‘But because of yotir youth, your dean records, because of 
your fine families, and b^use the law in its majesty does not 
seek vengeance, I hereby sentence you to three years’ con- 
finement to the penitentiary. Sentence to be suspended.* 

Only forty years of profosional mourning I^t the over- 
whelming frustration a^ hatred from showing on Amerigo 


7 



Bonasera’s face. His beautiful young daughter was still in the 
hospital with her broken jaw wired together; and now these 
two animaks went free? It had all been a farce. He watched the 
happy parents cluster around their darling sons. Oh, they 
were all happy now, they were smiling now. 

The black bile, sourly bitter, rose in Bonasera’s throat, over- 
flowed through tightly clenched teeth. He used his white linen 
pocket handkerchief and held it against his lips. He was stand- 
ing so when the two young men strode freely up the aisle, 
confident and cool-eyed, smiling, not giving him so much as a 
glance. He let them pass without saying a word, pressing the 
fresh linen against his mouth. 

The parents of the animaks were coming by now, two men 
and two women his age but more American in their dress. 
They glanced at him, shamefaced, yet in their eyes was an odd, 
triumphant defiance. 

Out of control, Bonasera leaned forward towards the aisle 
and shouted hoarsely, * You will weep as I have wept - I wiU 
make you weep as your children make me weep ’ - the linen at 
his eyes now. The defence attorneys bringing up the rear 
swept their clients forward in a tight little band, enveloping 
the two young men, who had started back down the aisle as if 
to protect their parents. A huge bailifiF moved quickly to block 
the row in which Bonasera stood. But it Was not necessary. 

All his years in America, Amerigo Bonasera had trusted in 
law and order. And he had prospered thereby! Now, though 
his brain smoked with hatred, though wild visions of buying a 
gun and killing the two young men jangled the very bones of 
his skull, Bonasera turned to his still uncomprehending wife 
and explained to her, *They have made fools of us.’ He paused 
and thpn made his decision, no longer fearing the cost. *For 
justice we must go on our knees to Don G>rleone.’ 

In a garishly decorated Los Angeles hotel suite, Johnny 
Fontane was as jealously drunk as any ordinary husband. 
Sprawled on a red couch, he drank straight from the bottle of 
Scotch in his hand, then washed the taste away by dunking his 
mouth in a crystalbucketoficecubes and water. It was four in the 
morning and he was spinning drunkenfimtasies of murdetinghis 

8 



trampy wife when she got home. If she ever did come home. It 
was too late to call his first wife and ask about the kids and 
he felt funny about calling any of his friends now that his career 
was plunging downhill. Hierchad becnatime when they would 
have been delighted, flattered by his calling them at four in the 
morning but now he bored them. He could even smile a little to 
himself as he thought that on ijic way up Johnny Fontanels tro- 
ubles had fascinated some of the greatest female stars in America. 

Gulping at his bottle of Scotch, he heard finally his wife’s 
key in the door, but he kept drinking until she walked into the 
room and stood before him. She was to him so very beautiful, 
the angelic face, soulful violet eyes, the delicately fragile but 
perfectly formed body. On the screen her beauty was magni- 
fied, spiritualized. A hundred million men all over the world 
were in love with the face of Margot Ashton. And paid to see 
it on the screen. 

* Where the hell were you?’ Johnny Fontane asked. 

* Out fucking,’ she said. 

She had misjudged his drunkenness. He sprang over the 
cocktai) table and grabbed her by the throat. But close up to 
that magical face, the lovely violet eyes, he lost his anger and 
became . helpless again. She made the mistake of smiling 
mockingly, saw his fist draw back. She screamed, ^Johnny, not 
in the face, I’m making a picture.’ 

She was laughing. He punched her in the stomach and .she 
fell to the floor. He fell bn top of her. He could smell her 
fragrant breath as she gasped for air. He punched her on the 
arms and on the thigh muscles of her silky tanned legs. He 
beat her as he had beaten snott^^maller kids long ago when he 
had been a tough teenager in New York’s Hell’s Kitchen. A 
painful punishment that would leave no lasting dis^guremenr 
of loosened teeth or broken nose. 

But he was not bitting her hard enough. He couldn’t. And 
she 'was giggling at him. Spread-eagl^ on the floor, her 
brocaded gown hitched up atove her thighs, she taunted him 
between giggles. *Comc on, stick it in. Stick it in, Johnny, 
that’s what you really want.’ 

Johnny Fontane got up. He hated the woman on the floor, 
but her beauty was a magic shield. Margot rolled away, and tn 


9 



a daticer’s spring was on her feet £icing him. She went into a 
childish mocking dance and chanted^ * Johnny never hurt me, 
Johnny never hurt me.* Then almost sadly with grave beauty 
she said, ‘You poor silly bastard, giving me cramps like a kid. 
Ah, Johnny, you always will be a dumb romantic guinea, you 
even make love like a Idd. You still think screwing is really like 
those dopey songs you used to sing.* She shook her head smd 
said, ‘Poor Johnny. Goodbye, Johnny.* She walked into the 
bedroom and he heard her turn the key in the lock. 

Johnny sat on the floor with his fltce in his hands. The sick, 
humiliating despair overwhelmed him. And then the gutter 
toughness that had helped him survive the jungle of Holly- 
wood made him pick up the phone and call for a car to take 
him to the airport. There was one person who could save 
him. He would go back to New York. He would go back to 
the one man with the power, the wisdom, he needed and a love 
he still trusted. His Godfather Corleone. 

The baker, Na 2 orine, pudgy and crusty as his great Italian 
loaves, still dusty with flour, scowled at his wife, his nubile 
daughter, Katherine, and his baker’s helper, Enao. Bozo had 
changed into his prisoner-of-war uniform with its green- 
lettered armband and was terrified that this scene would make 
him late reporting back to Governor’s Island. One of the 
many thousands of Italian Army prisoners paroled daily to 
work in the American economy, he lived in constant fear of 
that parole being revoked. And so the* little comedy being 
play^ now 'was, for him, a serious business. 

Nazorine asked fiercely, ‘Have you dishonoured my fiunily? 
Have you given my daughter a litde package to remember you 
by npw that the war is over and you know America will Idck 
your ass back to your village full of shit in Sicily?* 

Enzo, a very short, strongly built boy, put his hmd oirer his 
heart and said almost in tears, yet clevedy, *Padram^ Iswcatrhy 
the Holy Virgin I have never taken advantage of your kind- 
ness. 1 love your daughter with all reQ>ect. 1 asl^ for her 
band widi all respect. 1 know 1 have no right, but if they send 
me back to Italy I can never come back to America. 1 will 
never be able to marry Katherine.* 


lO 



Na2odne*s wife, Filomena, spoke to the point. ‘ Stop all this 
foolishness/ she said to her pudgy husband. * You know what 
you must, do. Keep Enzo here, send him to hide with our 
cousins in Long Island.’ 

Katherine was weeping. She was already plump, homely, and 
sprouting a faint moustache. She would never get a husband as 
Iiandsome as Enzo, never find another man who touched her 
body in secret places with such respectful love. ‘ I’ll go and live 
in Italy,’ she screamed at her father. ‘I’ll run away if you don’t 
keep Enzo here.’ 

Nazorine glanced at her shrewdly. She was a ‘hot number’ 
this daughter of his. He had seen her brush her swelling 
buttocks .against Enzo’s front when the baker’s helper 
squeezed behind her to fill the counter baskets with hot loaves 
from the oven. The young rascal’s hot loaf would be in 
oven, Nazorine thought lewdly, if proper steps were not 
taken. Enzo must be kept in America and be made an American 
citizen. And there was only one man who could arrange $uch 
an afEsir, The Godfather. Don Corleone. 

All of these people and many others received engraved 
invitations to the wedding of Miss Constanzia Corleone, to be 
celebrated on the last Saturday in August 1945. The father of 
the bride, Don Vito Corleone, never forgot his old friends and 
neighbours though he himself now lived in a huge house on 
Long Island. The reception would be held in that house and 
the festivities would go on all day. There was no doubt it 
would be a momentous occasion. Ihe war with the Japanese 
had just ended, so there would not be any nagging fear for 
their sons fighting in the Army to cloud these festivities. A 
wedding was just what people needed to show their joy. . 

And so on that Saturday morning the friends of Don Cor* 
leone streamed out of New York City to do him honour. They 
bore cream-coloured envelopes stuffed with cash as bridal 
gifts, no cheques. Inside each envelope a card established the 
identity of the giver and the measure of his respect for the 
Godfiither. A respect truly earned. 

Don Vito torlcone was a man to whom everybody came 
for help, and never were they disappointed. He made no 


II 



empty promises, nor the craven excuse that bis hands were 
tied by more powerful forces in the world than himself. It was 
not necessary that he be your friend, it was not even important 
that you had no means with which to repay him. Only one 
thing was required. That you, joh ytutrseJf^ proclaim your 
friendship. And then, no matter how poor or powerless the 
supplicant, Don Corleone would take that man's troubles to 
his heart. And he would let nothing stand in the way to a 
solution of that man’s woe. His reward? Friendship, the 
respectful title of ‘Don*, and sometimes the more affectionate 
salutation of ‘Godfather’. And perhaps, to show respect only, 
never for profit, some humble gift - a gallon of homemade 
wine or a basket of peppered iarclUs specially baked to grace 
his Christmas table. It was understo^ it was mete good 
manners, to proclaim that you were in his debt and that he 
had the right to call upon you at any time to redeem your 
debt by some small service. 

Now on this great day, his daughter’s wedding day, Don 
Vito Corleone stood in the doorway of his Long Beach home 
to greet his guests, all of them known, all of them trusted. 
Many of them owed their good fortune in life to the Don and 
on this intimate occasion felt free to call him ‘Godfather’ to 
his face. Even the people performing festal services were his 
friends. The bartender was an old comrade whose gift was all 
the wedding liqueurs and his own expert skills. The waiters 
were the friends of Don Corleone’s sons. The food on the 
garden picnic tables had been cooked by the Don’s wife and 
her friends, and the gaily festooned one-acre garden itself had 
been decorated by the young girl-chums of the bride. 

Don Corleone received everyone - rich and poor, powerful 
and humble - with an equal show of love. He slighted no one. 
That was his character. And the guests so exclaimed at bow 
well he looked in his tux that an inexperienced observer might 
easily have thought the Don himself was the lucky groom. 

Standing at the door with him were two of his three sons. 
The eldest, baptized Santino but called Sonny by everyone 
except his father, was looked at askance by the older Italian 
men; with admiration by the younger. Sonny Corleone was 
tall for a first-generation American of Italian parentage. 


12 



almost six feet, and his crop of bushy, curly hair made liim 
look even taller. His face was that of a gross Cupid, the 
features even but the bow-shaped lips thickly sensual, the 
dimpled cleft chin in some curious way obscene. He was built 
as powerfully as a bull, and it was common knowledge that he 
was so generously endowed by nature that his martyred wife 
feared the marriage bed as unbelievers once feared the rack. 
It was whispered that when as a youth he had visited houses of 
iU fame, even the most hardened and fearless putain^ after an 
awed inspection of his massive organ, demanded double 
price. 

Here at the wedding feast, some young matrons, wide- 
hipped, wide-mouthed, measured Sonny Corleonc with cooDy 
confident eyes. But on this particular day they were wasting 
their time. Sonny Corleone, despite the presence of his wife 
and three small children, had plans for his sister’s maid of 
honour, Lucy Mancini. This young girl, fully aware, sat at a 
garden table iti her pink formal gown, a tiara of dowers in her 
glossy black hair. She had dirted with Sonny in the past week 
of rehearsals and squeezed his hand that morning at the altar. 
A maiden could do no more. 

She did not care that he ^ ould never be the great man his 
father had proved to be. Sonny Corleonc had strength, he had 
courage. He was generous and his heart was admitted to be as 
big as his organ. Yet he did not have his father’s humility but 
instead a quick, hot temper that led him into errors of judge- 
ment. Though he was a great help in his father’s business, 
there were many who doubted that he would become the 
heir to it. 

The second son, Frcdcrico, called Fred or Frtdo, was a 
child every Italian prayed to the saints for. Dutiful, loyal, 
always at the service of Us father, living with his patents at age 
thirty. He was short and burly, not handsome but with the 
same Cupid head of the famOy, the curly helmet of hair over 
the round face and sensual bow-shaped Kps. Only, in Fred, 
these lips were not sensual but graniteKke. Inclined to dour- 
ness, he was stiU a crutch to his &ther, never disputed him, 
never embarrassed him by scandalous behaviour with women. 
Despite all these virtues, he did not have that personal 

15 



magnetism, that animal force, so necessary for a leader of men, 
and he, too, was not expected to inherit the family business. 

The third son, Michael Corleone, did not stand with his 
father and his two brothers but sat at a table in the most 
secluded corner of the garden. But even there he could not 
escape the attentions of the family friends. 

Michael Corleone was the youngest son of the Don and the 
only child who had refused the great man’s direction. He did 
not have the heavy, Cupid-shaped face of the other children, 
and. his jet black hair was straight rather than curly. His skin 
was a clear olive-brown that would have been called beautiful 
in a girl. He was handsome in a delicate way. Indeed there had 
been a time when the Don had worried about his youngest 
son’s masculinity. A worry that was put to rest when Michael 
Corleone became seventeen years old. 

Now this youngest son sat at a table in the extreme comer 
of the garden to proclaim his chosen alienation from father 
and family. Beside him sat the American girl everyone had 
heard about but whom no one had seen until this day. He had, 
of course, shown the proper respect and introduced her to 
everyone at the wedding, including his family. They were not 
impressed with her. She was too thin, she was too fair, her 
face was too sharply intelligent for a woman, her manner too 
free for a maiden. Her name, too, was outlandish to their 
ears ; she called herself Kay Adams. If she had told them that 
her family had settled in America two hundred years ago and 
her name was a common one, they would have shrugged. 

Every guest noticed that the Don paid no particular atten- 
tion to this third son. Michael had been hiS favourite before 
the vfar and obviously the chosen heir to run the family 
business when the proper moment came. He had all the quiet 
force and intelligence of his great father, the born instinct to 
act in such a way that men had no recourse but to respect him. 
But when World War II broke out, Michael Corleone volun- 
teered for the Marine Corps. He defied his father’s express 
command when he did so. 

Don Corleone had no desire, no intention, of letdng his 
youngest son be killed in the service of a power foreign to 
hims^. Doctors had been bribed, secret arrangements had 

M 



been made. A gteat deal of money had been spent to take*the 
proper precautions. But Midbael was twenty-one years of age 
and nothing could be done against his own wilfulness. He 
enlisted and fought over the Pacific Ocean. He became a 
Captain and won medals. In 1944 his picture was printed in 
Uft magazine with a 'photo layout of his deeds. A friend had 
shown Don Corleone the magazine (his family did not dare), 
and the Don had grunted disdainfully and said, ‘ He performs 
those miracles for strangers.’ 

When Michael Corleone was discharged early in 1945 to 
recover from a disabling wound he had no idea that his father 
had arranged his release. He stayed home for a few weeks, 
then, without consulting anyone, entered Dartmouth College 
in Hanover, New Hampshire, and so he left his father’s house. 
To return for the wedding of his sister and to show his own 
future wife to them, the washed-out rag of an American girl. 

Michael Corleone was amusing Kay Adams by telling her 
Uttle stories about some of the more colourful wedding guests. 
He was, in turn, amused by her finding these people exotic, 
and, as always, charmed by her intense interest in anything 
new and foreign to her experience. Finally her attention was 
caught by a small group of men gathered around a wooden 
barrel of homemade wine. The men were Amerigo Bonasera, 
Nazorine the baker, Anthony Coppola, and Luca Brasi. With 
her usual alert intelligence she remarked on the fact that these 
four men did not seem particularly happy. Michael smiled. 

•No, they’re not,’ he said. ^They’re waiting to see my father 
in private. They have favours to ask.’ And indeed it was easy to 
see that all four men constantly followed the Don with their eyes. 

As Don Corleone stood greeting guests, a black Chevrolet 
sedan came to a stop on the far side of the paved mall. Two 
men in the front seat puUed notebooks from their jackets and, 
with no attempt at concealment, jotted down licence numbers 
of the other cars parked around tne mall. Sonny turned to his 
father and said, ‘Those guys over there must be cops.’ 

Don Corleone shrugged. ‘1 don’t own the street. They can 
do what they please.’ 

Sonny’s heavy Cupid fyot grew ted with anger. ‘Those 



lousy bastards, they don’t respect anything.* He left the steps 
of the house and walked across the mall to where the black 
sedan was parked. He thrust his face angrily close to the face 
of the driver, who did not flinch but flapped open his wallet 
to show a green identification card. Sonny stepped back 
without saying a word. He spat so that the spittle hit the back 
door of the sedan and walked away. He was hoping the driver 
would get out of the sedan and come after him, on the mall, 
but nothing happened. When he reached the steps he said to 
his father, ‘Those guys arc FBI men. They’re taldng down all 
the licence numbers. Snotty bastards.’ 

Don Corlcone knew who they were. His closest and most 
intimate friends had been advised to attend the wedding in 
automobiles not their own. And though he disapproved of his 
son’s foolish displa^^ of auger, the tantrum served a purpose. It 
would convince the interlopers that their presence was un- 
expected and unprepared for. So Don Corlcone himself was 
not angry. He had long ago learned that society imposes 
insults that must be borne, comforted by the knowledge that 
in this world there comes a time when the most humble of 
men, if he keeps his eyes open, can take his revenge on the 
most powerful. It was this knowledge that prevented the Don 
from losing the humility all his friends admired in him. 

But now in the garden behind the house, a four-piece band 
began to play. All the guests had arrived. Don Corlcone put the 
intruders out of his mind and led his two sons to the wedding 
feast. 

There were, now, hundreds of guests in the huge garden, 
some dancing on the wooden platform bedecked with fl.owcrs, 
others' sitting at long tables piled high with spicy food and 
gallon jugs of black, homemade wine. The bride, Connie 
Corlcone, sat in splendour at a special raised table with her 
groon\ the maid of honour, bridesmaids, and ushers. It was a 
rustic setting in the old Italian style. Not to the bride’s taste, but 
Connie had consented to a ‘ guinea ’ wedding to please her father 
because she had so displeasured him in her choice of a husband. 

The groom. Carlo Rixzi, was a half-breed, bom of a Sicilian 
fiither and the North Italian mother from whom he had 

i6 



inherited his blond hair and blue eyes. His parents li^ed in 
Nevada and Carlo had left that state because of a little trouble 
with the law. In New York he met Sonny Corleone and so met 
the sister. Don Corleone, of course, sent trusted friends to 
Nevada and they reported that Carlo’s police trouble was a 
youthful indiscretion with a gun, not serious, that could 
easily be wiped off the books to leave the youth with a dean 
record. They also came back with detailed information on legal 
gambling in Nevada which greatly interested the Don and 
which he had been pondering over since. It was part of the 
Don's greatness that he profited from everything. 

Connie Corleone was a not quite pretty girl, thin and 
nervous and certain to become shrewish later in life. But 
today, transformed by her white bridal gown and eager 
virginity, she was so radiant as to be almost beautiful. Beneath 
the wooden table her hand rested on the muscular thigh of her 
groom. Her Cupid-bow mouth pouted to give him an airy 
Uss. 

She thought him incredibly handsome. Carlo Rizzi had 
worked in the open desert air while very young - heavy 
labourer’s work. Now he had tremendous forearms and his 
shoulders bulged the jacket of his tux. He basked in the 
adoring eyes of his bride and filled her glass with wine. He 
was elaborately courteous to her as if they were both actors in 
a play. But his eyes kept flickering towards the huge silk purse 
the bride wore on her right shoulder and whic^ was now 
stuffed full of money envelopes. How much did it hold? Ten 
thousand? Twenty thousand? Carlo Rizzi smiled. It was only 
the beginning. He had, after all, married into a royal family. 
They would have to take cate of him. , 

In the crowd of guests a dapper young man with the sleek 
head of a ferret was also studying the silk purse. From sheer 
habit Paulie Gatto wondered just how he could go about 
hijacking that fat pocketbook. The idea amused him. But he 
knew it was idle, innocent dreaming, as small children dream 
of knocking out tanks with pop-guns. He watched his boss, fat, 
middle-aged Peter Qemenza whiding young girls around the 
wooden dance floor in a rustic and lusty TaranttUa, Qemenza, 
immensely tall, immensely huge, danced with such skill and 



abandon, his hard belly lecherously bumping the breasts of 
younger, tinier women, that all the guests were applauding 
him. Older women grabbed his arm to become his next 
partner. The younger men respectfully cleared off the floor and 
clapped their hands in time to the mandolin’s wild strumming. 
When Qemenaa finally collapsed in a chair, Paulie Gatto 
brought him a glass of icy. black wine and wiped the per- 
spiring Jovelike brow with his silk handkerchief. Clemenaa 
was blowing like a whale as he gulped down the wine. But 
instead of thanking Paulie he said curtly, * Never mind being a 
dance judge, do your job. Take a walk around the neighbour- 
hood and see everything is OK.’ Paulie slid away into the 
crowd. 

The band took a refreshment break. A young man named 
Nino Valenti picked up a discarded mandolin, put his left foot 
up on a chair, and began to sing a coarse Sicilian love song. 
Nino Valenti’s face was handsome though bloated by con- 
tinual drinking and he was already a little drunk. He rolled his 
eyes as his tongue caressed the obscene lyrics. The women 
shrieked with glee and the men shouted the last word of each 
stanza with the singer. 

Don Corleone, notoriously straitlaced in such matters, 
though his stout wife was screaming jo3rfully with the others, 
disappeared tactfully into the house. Seeing this. Sonny 
Corleone made his way to the bride*s table and sat down 
beside young Lucy Mancini, the maid of honour. They were 
safe. His wife was in the kitchen putting the last touches on the 
serving of the wedding cake. Sonny whispered a few words in 
the young girl’s ear and she rose. Sonny waited a few minutes 
and then casually followed her, stopping to talk with a guest 
here and there as he worked his way through the crowd. 

All eyes followed them. The maid of honour, thoroughly 
Americanized by three years of college, was a ripe girl who 
already had a ‘reputation*. All through the marriage re- 
hearsals she had flirted with Sonny Corleone in a teasing, 
joking way she thought was permitted because he was the best 
man and her wedding partner. Now holding her pink gown up 
off the ground, Lucy Mancini went into the house, smiling 
with false innocence, ran lightly up the stairs to ^e bath- 

18 



room. She stayed there for a few moments. When she came out 
Sonny Cotkone was on the landing above, beckoning her 
upward. 

From behind the closed window of Don Codeone’s * ofiice', 
a slightly raised corner room, Thomas Hagen watched the 
wedding party in the festooned garden. The walls behind 
him were stacked with law books. Hagen was the Don’s 
lawyer and acting Consigiiori^ or counsellor, and as such held 
the most vital subordinate position in the family business* He 
and die Don had solved many a knotty problem in this room, 
and so when he saw the Gc^ather leave the festiviues and 
enter the house, he knew, wedding or no, there would be a 
litde work this day. The Don would be coming to see him. 
Then Hagen saw Sonny Corleone whisper in Lucy Mancini’s 
ear and their litde comedy as he followed her into the house. 
Hagen grimaced, debated whether to inform the Don, and 
decided against it. He went to the desk and picked up a hand- 
written list of the people who had been granted permission to 
see Don Corleone privately. When the Don entered the room 
Hagen handed him the list. Don Corleone nodded and said, 
’Leave Bonasera to the end. ’ 

Hagen used the french doors and went directly out into the 
garden to where the supplicants clustered around the barrel of 
wine. He pointed to the baker, the pudgy Nazorine. 

Don Corleone greeted the baker with an embrace. They had 
played together as children in Italy and had grown up in 
friendship. Every Easter freshly baked clotted-cheese and 
wheat-germ pies, their crusts yolk-gold, big around as truck 
wheels, surrived at Don Corleone’s home. On Christmas, on 
fiunily birthdays, rich creamy pastries proclaimed* the Nazo- 
rines* respect. And all through the years, lean and fat, Nazo- 
rine cheerfully paid his dues to the l^ery union organized by 
the Don in his salad days. Never asking for a favour in return 
except for the chance to buy black-market OPA sugar 
coupons during the war. Now the time had come for the baker 
to oaim his rights as a loyal friend, and Don Corleone looked 
forward '4rith great pleasure to granting his request. 

He gave the baker a Di Nobili cigar and a glass of ydlow 
Stt^and put his hand on the man’s shotdder to urge him on. 


19 



That was the mark of the Don’s humanity. He knew from 
bitter experience what courage it took to ask a favour from a 
fellow man. 

The baker told the story of his daughter and Enzo. A fine 
Italian lad from Sicily; captured by the American Army; sent 
to the United States as a prisoner of war; given parole to help 
our war effort! A pure and honourable love had sprung up 
between honest Enzo and his sheltered Katherine, but now 
that the war was ended the poor lad would be repatriated to 
Italy and Nazorine’s daughter would surely die of a broken 
heart. Only Godfather Corleone could help this afflicted 
couple. He was their last hope. 

The Don walked Nazorine up and down the room, his hand 
on the baker’s shoulder, his head nodding with understanding 
to keep up the man’s courage. When the baker had finished 
Don Corleone smiled at him and said, ‘ My dear friend, put all 
your worries aside.’ He went on to explain very carefully what 
must be done. The Congressman of the district must be 
petitioned. The Congressman would propose a special bill that 
would allow Enzo to become a citizen. The bill would surely 
pass Congress. A privilege all those rascals extended to each 
other. Don Corleone explained that this would cost money, 
the going price was now two thousand dollars. He, Don 
Corleone, would guarantee performance and accept payment. 
Did his friend agree? 

The baker nodded his head vigorously. He did not expect 
such a great favour for nothing. That was understood. A 
special Act of Congress docs not come cheap. Nazorine was 
almost tearful in his thanks. Don Corleone walked him to the 
door, assuring him that competent people would be sent to the 
bakery*to arrange all details, complete all necessary documents. 
The baker embraced him before disappearing into the 
garden. 

Hagen smiled at the Don. ‘That’s a good investment for 
Nazorine. A son-in-law and a cheap lifetime helper in his 
bakery all for two thousand dollars.’ He paused. ‘Who do I 
give this job to?* 

Don Corleone frowi^d in thought. ‘Nor to our paisan. Give 
it to the Jew in the next district. Have the home addresses 


ao 



changed. 1 think thete might be many such cases now the war 
is over; we should have extra people in Washington that can 
handle the overflow and not raise the price.’ Hagen made a 
note on his pad. ‘Not Congressman Luteco. Try Fischer.’ 

The next man Hagen brought in was a very simple case. His 
name was Anthony Coppola and he was the son of a man Don 
Corleone had worked with in the railroad yards in his youth. 
Coppola needed five hundred dollars to open a pizzeria ; for a 
deposit on fixtures and the special oven. For reasons not 
gone into, credit was not available. The Don reached into his 
pocket and took out a roll of bills. It was not quite enough. He 
grimaced and said to Tom Hagen, ‘Loan me a hundred 
dollars, I’ll pay you back Monday when I go to the bank.’ The ' 
supplicant protested that four hundred dollars would be 
ample, but Don Corleone patted his shoulder, saying, apolo- 
getically, ‘This fancy wedding left me a little short of cash.’ 
He took the money Hagen extended to him and gave it to 
Anthony Coppola with his own roll of bills. 

Hagen watched with quiet admiration. The Don always 
taught that when a man was generous, he must show the 
generosity as personal. How flattering to Anthony Coppola 
that a man like the Don would borrow to loan him money. Not 
that Coppola did not know that the Don was a millionaire, but 
how many millionaires let themselves be put to even a small 
inconvenience by a poor friend? 

The Don raised his head inquiringly. Hagen said, ‘He’s not 
on the h'st but Luca Brasi wants to see you. He understands it 
can’t be public but he wants to congratulate you in person.’ 

For the first time the Don seemed displeased. The answer 
was devious. ‘Is it necessary?’ he asked. , 

Hagen shrugged. ‘You understand him better than I do. 
But he was very grateful that you invited him to the wedding. 
He never expected that. I think he wants to show his gratitude.’ 

Don Corleone nodded and gestured that Luca Brasi should 
be brought to him. 

In the garden Kay Adams was struck by the violet fury 
imprinted on the face of Luca Brasi. She asked about him. 
Michael had brought Kay to the wedding so that she would 
slowly, and perhaps without too much of a shock, absorb the 


21 



tnith about his father. But so fat she seemed to regard the 
Don as a slightly unethical businessman. Michael decided to 
tell her part of the truth indirectly. He explained that Luca 
Brasi was one of the most feared men in the Eastern under- 
world. His great talent, it was said, was that he could do a job 
of murder all by himself, without confederates, which auto- 
matically made discovery and conviction by the law almost 
impossible. Michael grimaced and said, don’t know whether 
all that stuff is true. I do know he is sort of a friend to my 
Bither.’ 

For the first time Kay began to understand. She asked a little 
incredulously, * You’re not hinting that a man like that works 
for your father?’ 

llie heU with it, he thought. He said, straight out, ‘Nearly 
fifteen years ago some people wanted to take over my father’s 
oil importing business. They tried to kill him and nearly did. 
Luca Brasi went after them. The story is that he killed six men 
in two weeks and that ended the famous olive oil war.’ He 
smiled as if it were a joke. 

Kay shuddered. ‘You mean your father was shot by 
gangsters?’ 

‘Fifteen years ago,’ Michael said. ‘Everything’s been peace- 
ful since then.’ He was afraid he had gone too far. 

‘You're trying to scare me,’ Kay said. ‘You just don’t want 
me to marry you.’ She smiled at him and poked his ribs with 
her elbow. ‘Very clever.’ 

Michael smiled back at her. ‘1 want you to think about it,’ he 
said. 

‘Did he really kill six men?’ Kay asked. 

‘That’s what the newspapers claimed,’ Mike said. ‘Nobody 
ever proved it. But there’s another story about him that 
nobody ever tells. It’s supposed to be so terrible that even my 
father won’t talk about it. Tom Hagen knows the story and he 
won’t tell me. Once I kidded him, 1 said, “When will I be old 
enough to hear that story about Luca?’’ and Tom said, “When 
you’re a hundred.”' Michael sipped his glass of wine. ‘That 
must be some story. That must be some Luca.’ 

Luca Brasi was indeed a man to frighten the devil in hell 
himself. Short, squat, massive-skulled, his presence sent out 


22 



aknn bdb of danger. HU &ce vas stamped into a mask of 
fury. The eyes were brown but with none of the warmth 
of that colour, more a deadly tan. The mouth was not so 
much cruel as lifeless; thin, rubbery, and the colour of 
veal. 

Brasi’s reputation for violence was awesome and his devo- 
tion to Don Corleone legendary. He was, in himself, one of the 
great blocks that supported the Don’s power structure. His 
kind was a rarity. 

Luca Brasi did not feat the police, he did not fear society, he 
did not fear God, he did not fear hell, he did not fear or love 
his fellow man. Put he had elected, he had chostn^ to fear and 
love I>on Corleone. Ushered into the presence of the Don, the 
terrible Brasi held himself sti£F with respect. He stuttered over 
the flowery congratulations he offered and his formal hope 
that the first grandchild would be masculine. He then handed 
the Don an envelope stuffed with cash as a gift for the bridal 
couple. 

So that was what he wanted to do. Hagen noticed the 
change in Don Corleone. The Don received Brasi as a king 
greets a subject who has done him an enormous service, never 
fiimiliar but with regal respect. With every gesture, with every 
word, Don Corleone made it clear to Luca Brasi that he was 
pahtid. Not for one moment did he show surprise at the 
wedding gift being presented to him personally. He under- 
stood. 

The money in the envelope was sure to be more than anyone 
else had given. Brasi had spent many hours deciding on the 
sum, comparing it to what the other guests might offer. He 
wanted to be the most generous to show that he h^d the most 
respect, and that was why he had given his envdope to the 
Don personally, a gauchc^e the Don overlooked in his own 
flowery sentence of thanks. Hagen saw Luca Brasi’s face lose 
its mask of fury, swell with pdde and pleasiire, Brasi kissed the 
Don’s hand before he went out the door that Hagen held 
open. Hagen prudently gave Brasi a fdendly smile which the 
squat man admowledged with a polite stretdung of rubbery, 
veal-coloured lips. 

^ When the door closed Don Corleone gave a small sigh of 

*1 



relief. Brasi was the only man in the world who could make 
him nervous. The man was like a natural force, not truly 
subject to control. He had to be handled as gingerly as dyna- 
mite. The Don shrugged. Even dynamite could be exploded 
harmlessly if the need arose. He looked qucstioningly at 
Hagen. 'Is Bonasera the only one left?’ 

Hagen nodded. Don Corleone frowned in thought, then 
said, ‘ Before you bring him in, teU Santino to come here. He 
should learn some things.* 

Out in the garden, Hagen searched anxiously for Sonny 
Corleone. He told the waiting Bonasera to be patient and went 
over to Michael Corleone and his girlfriend. ‘Did you sec 
Sonny around?’ he asked. Michael shook his head. Damn, 
Hagen thought, if Sonny was screwing the maid of honour all 
this time there was going to be a mess of trouble. His wife, the 
young girl’s family; it could be a disaster. Anxiously he 
hurried to the entrance through which he had seen Sonny 
disappear almost a half hour ago. 

Seeing Hagen go into the house, Kay Adams asked Michael 
Corleone, *Who is he? You introduced him as your brother, 
but his name is different and be certainly doesn’t look Italian.’ 

‘Tom lived with us since he was twelve years old,’ Michael 
said. ‘His parents died and he was roaming around the streets 
with this bad eye infection. Sonny brought him home one 
night and he just stayed. He didn’t have any place to go. He 
lived with us until he got married.’ 

Kay Adams was thrilled. ‘That’s really romantic,’ she said. 
‘Your father must be a warmhearted person. To adopt some- 
body just like that when he had so many children of his own.’ 

Michael didn’t bother to point out that immigrant Italians 
considered four children a smaU family. He merely said, 'Tom 
wasn’t adopted. He just lived with us.’ 

‘Oh,’ Kay said, then asked curiously, ‘why didn’t you adopt 
him?’ 

Michael laughed. ‘Because my father said it would be dis- 
respectful for Tom to change his name. Disrespectful to his 
own parents.’ 

They saw Hagen shoo Sonny through the french door into 
the Don’s office and then crook a finger at Amerigo Bonasera. 


M 



'Why do they bother your father with business on a day like 
this?’ Kay asked. 

Michael laughed again. ' Because they know that by tradition 
no Sicilian can refuse a request on his daughter’s wedding 
day. And no Sicilian erer lets a chance like that go by.’ 

Lucy Manciiii lifted her pink gown oH^ the floor and ran up 
the steps. Sonny Corleone’s heavy Cupid face, redly obscene 
with winey lust, frightened her, but she had teased him for the 
past week to just this end. In her two college love affairs she 
had felt nothing and neither of them lasted more than a week. 
Quarrelling, her second lover had mumbled something about 
her being 'too big down there’. Lucy had understood and for 
the rest of the school term had reused to go out on any 
dates. 

During the summer, preparing for the wedding of her best 
friend, Connie Corleone, Lucy heard the whispered stories 
about Sonny. One Sunday afternoon in the Corleone kitchen. 
Sonny’s wife Sandra gossiped freely. Sandra was a coarse, 
good-natured woman who had been born in Italy but brought 
to America as a small child. She was strongly built with great 
breasts and had already borne three children in five years of 
marriage. Sandra and the other women teased Connie about 
the terrors of the nuptial bed. *My God,’ Sandra had giggled, 
'when I saw that pole of Sonny’s for the first time and realized 
he was going to stick it into I yelled bloody murder. After 
the first year my insides felt as mushy as macaroni boiled for 
an hour. When I heard he was doing the job on other girls I 
went to church and lit a candle.’ 

They had all laughed, but Lucy had felt her flesh twitching 
between her legs. 

Now as she ran up the steps towards Sonny a tremendous 
flash of desire went through her body. On the landing Sonny 
grabbed her hand and pulled her down the hall into an empty 
i^droom. Her legs went weak as the door dosed behind them. 
She fdt Sonny’s moudi on hers, his lips tasting of burnt 
tobacco, bitter. She opened her mouth. At that moment she 
felt his hand come up beneath her bridesmaid’s gown, heard 
die rusde of material giving way, fidt his large warm hand 


*5 



between her legs, tipping aside the satin panties to caress her 
vulva. She put her arms around his neck and hung there as he 
opened his trousers. Then be placed both hands beneath her 
bare buttocks and lifted her. She gave a little hop in the air so 
that both her legs were wrapped around his upper thighs. His 
tongue was in her mouth and she sucked on it. He gave a 
savage thrust that banged her head against the door. She felt 
something burning pass between her thighs. She let her right 
hand drop from his neck and reached down to guide him . 
Her hand closed around an enormous, blood-gorged pole of 
muscle. It pulsated in her hand like an animal and almost 
weeping with grateful ecstasy she pointed it into her own wet, 
turgid flesh. The thrust of its entering, the unbelievable 
pleasure made her gasp, brought her legs up almost around his 
neck, and then like a quiver, her body received the savage 
arrows of his lightning-like thrusts; innumerable, torturing; 
arching her pelvis higher and higher until for the first time in 
her life she reached a shattering climax, felt his hardness break 
smd then the crawly flood of semen over her thighs. Slowly 
her legs relaxed from around his body, slid down until they 
reach^ the floor. They leaned against each other, out of 
breath. 

It might have been going on for ;8ome time, but now they 
could hear the soft knocking on the door. Sonny quickly 
buttoned his trousers, meanwhile blocking the door so that it 
could not be opened. Lucy frantically smoothed down her 
pink gown, her eyes flickering, but the thing that had given 
her so much pleasure was hidden inside sober black cloth. 
Then they heard Tom Hagen’s voice, very low, ‘Sonny, you 
in there?’ 

Sonhy sighed with relief. He winked at Lucy. ‘Yeah, Tom, 
what is it?’ 

Hagen’s voice, still low, said, ‘The Don wants you in his 
oflice. Now.’ They could hear his footsteps as he walked away. 
Sonny waited for a few moments, gave Lucy a hard kiss on t^ 
lips, and then slipped out the door after Hagen. 

Lucy combed her hair. She checked her dress and pulled 
around her garter straps. Her body felt bruised, her lips pulpy 
and tender. She went out the door; and though she felt the 

a6 



sticky wetness between het thighs she did not go to the bath- 
room to wash but ran straight on down the steps and into the 
garden. She took her seat at the bridal table next to Q>nnie, 
who exclaimed petulantly, ‘Lucy, where were you? You look 
drunk. Stay beside me now.* 

The blond groom poured Lucy a glass of wine and smiled 
knowingly. Lucy didn’t care. She lifted the gtapey, dark red 
juice to her pa^ed mouth and drank. She fdt the sticky 
wetness between her thighs and pressed her legs together. 
Her body was trembling. Over the glass rim, as she drank, her 
eyes searched hungrily to find Sonny Corleone. There was no 
one else she cared to see. Slyly she whispered in Connie’s 
ear, ‘Only a few hours more and you’ll Imow what it’s all 
about.’ Connie giggled. Lucy demurely folded her hands on 
the table, treacherously triumphant, as if she had stolen a 
treasure from the bride. 

Amerigo Bonasera followed Hagen into the comer room.of 
the house and found Don Corleone sitting behind a huge desk. 
Sonny Corleone was standing by the window, lool^g out 
into the garden. For the first time that afternoon the Don 
behaved coolly. He did not embrace the visitor or shake 
hands. The sallow-faced undertaker owed his invitation to the 
fact that his wife and the wife of the Don were the closest of 
friends. Amerigo Bonasera himself was in severe disfavour 
with Don Corleone. 

Bonasera began his request obliquely and cleverly. ‘You 
must excuse my daughter, your wife’s goddaughter, for not 
doing your family the respect of coming today. She is in the 
hospital still.’ He glanced at Sonny Corleone^ and Tom 
Hagen to indicate that he did not wish to speak brforc them. 
But the Don was merciless. 

‘We all know of your daughter’s misfortune,’ Don Corleone 
said. ‘If I can help her in any way, you have only to speak. My 
wife is her godmother after all. 1 have never forgotten that 
honour.’ This was a rebuke. The undertaker never called Don 
Corleone ‘Godfather’ as custom dictated. 

Bonasera, ashen-fitced, asked, directly now, ‘May I speak to 
you alone?’ 


*7 



Don Corleone shook his head, *1 trust these two men with 
my life. They are my two tight arms. 1 cannot insult them by 
sending them away.’ 

The undertaker closed his eyes for a moment and then 
began to speak. His voice was quiet, the voice he used to con- 
sole the bereaved. raised my daughter in the American 
fashion. I believe in America. America has made my fortune. 
I gave my daughter her freedom and yet taught her never to 
dishonour her family. She found a “boyfriend”, not an 
Italian. She went to the movies with him. She stayed out late. 
But he never came to meet her parents. I accepted all this 
without a protest, the fault is mine. Two months ago he took 
her for a drive. He had a masculine friend with him. They 
made her drink whisky and then they tried to take advantage 
of her. She resisted. She kept her honour. They beat her. Like 
an animal. When I went to the hospital she had two black 
eyes. Her nose was broken. Her jaw was shattered. They had 
to wire it together. She wept through her pain. “Father, 
Father, why did they do it? Why did they do this to me?” 
And I wept.’ Bonasera could not speak further, he was weep- 
ing now though his voice had not betrayed his emotion. 

Den Corleone, as if against his will, made a gesture of 
sympathy and Bonasera went on, his voice human with 
suffering. ‘Why did I weep? She was the light of my life, an 
affectionate daughter. A beautiful girl. She tmsted people and 
now she will never trust them again. She will never be 
beautiful again.’ He was trembling, his sallow face flushed an 
ugly dark red. 

‘I went to the police like a good American. The two boys 
were arrested. They were brought to trial. The evidence was 
overwhelming and they pleaded guilty. The judge sentenced 
them to three years in prison and suspended the sentence. 
They went free that very day. I stood in the courtroom like a 
fool and those bastards smiled at me. And then 1 said to my 
wife: “We must go to Don Corleone for justice.’” 

Tlie Don had bowed his head to show respect for the man’s 
grief. But when he spdke, the words were cold with offended 
^gnity. ‘Why did you go to the police? Why didn’t you come 
to me at the beginning of this a£^?’ 

2S 



Bonasera muttered almost inaudibly, * What do you want of 
me? Tell me what you wish. But do what I beg you to do.* 
There was something almost insolent in his words, 

Don Corleonc said gravely, ‘And what is that?’ 

Bonasera glanced at Hagen and Sonny Corlcone and shook 
his head. The Don, still sitting at Hagen’s desk, inclined his 
body towards the undertaker. Bonasera hesitated, then bent 
down and put his lips so close to the Don’s hairy ear that they 
touched. Don Corlcone listened like a priest in the confes- 
sional, gazing away into the distance, impassive, remote. 
They stood so for a long moment until Bonasera finished 
whispering and straightened to his full height. The Don 
looked up gravely at Bonasera. Bonasera, his face Hushed, 
returned the stare unflinchingly. 

Finally the Don spoke. ‘That I cannot do. You are being 
carried away.’ 

Bonasera said loudly, clearly, ‘I will pay you anything you 
ask.* On hearing this, Hagen Hinched, a nervous flick of his 
head. Sonny Corlcone folded his arms, smiled sardonically as 
he turned from the window to watch the scene in the room for 
the first time. 

Don Corleone rose from behind the desk. His face was still 
impassive, but his voice rang like cold death. ‘ We have known 
each other many years, you and I,’ he said to the undertaker, 
‘but until this day you never came to me for coimsel or help. I 
can’t remember the last time you invited me to your house for 
coffee, though my wife is godmother to your only child. Let 
us be frank. You spurned my friendship. You feared to be in 
my debt.’ 

Bonasera murmured, ‘Ldidn’t want to get into trouble.* 

The Don held up his hand. ‘No. Don’t speak. You found 
America a paradise. You had a good trade, you made a good 
living, you thought the world a harmless place where you 
could take your pleasure as you willed. You never armed 
yourself with true friends. After all, the police guarded you, 
there were courts of law, you and yours could come to no 
harm. You did not need Don Corleone. Very well. My feelings 
were wounded, but I am not that sort of person who thrusts 
his friendship on those who do not value it - on those who 


*9 



thinlr me of little account/ The Don paused and gave the 
undertaker a polite, ironic smile. *Now you come to me and 
say, *^Don Corleone give me justice/* And you do not ask 
widi respect. You do not offer me your friendship. You come 
into my home on the bridal day of my daughter and you ask 
me to do murder and you say’ * here the Don’s voice became 
a scornful mimicry - will pay you anything/’ No, no, I 
am not offended, but what have I ever done to make you treat 
me so disrespectfully?’ 

Bonasera eded out in his anguish and his fear, 'America has 
been good to me. I wanted to be a good citizen. I wanted my 
child to be American.* 

The Don clapped his hands together with decisive approval. 
'Well spoken. Very fine. Then you have nothing to complain 
about. The judge has ruled. America has ruled. Bring your 
daughter flowers and a box of candy when you go visit her in 
the hospital. That will comfort her. Be content. After all, this 
is not a serious aflair, the boys were young, high-spirited, and 
one of them is the son of a powerful politician. No, my dear 
Amerigo, you have slwzys b^ honest. 1 must admit, though 
^ou spurned my friendship, that I would trust the given word 
of Amerigo Bonasera more than 1 would any other man’s. 
So give me your word that you will put aside this madness. 
It is not American. Forgive. Forget, life is full of mis- 
fortunes.’ 

The cruel and contemptuous irony with which all this was 
said, the controlled anger of the Don, reduced the poor under- 
taker to a quiveiing jelly, but he spoke up bravdy again. 'I 
ask you for justice.’ 

Don Corleone said curtly, 'The court gave you justice.* 

Bonasera 'Shook his head stubbornly. 'No. They gave the 
youths justice. They did not give me justice.* 

The Don acknowledged this fine dbtinedon with an 
approving nod, jdien ask^, 'What is your justice?’ 

'An eye for an eye,' Bonasera said. 

'You asked for more,* the Don said. 'Your daughter is 
alive.’ 

Bonasera said reluctantly, 'Let diem sufler as she suffers.* 
The Don waited for him to speak farther. Bonasera screwed 



up the last of his coufage and said, ^How much shall 1 pay 
you?’ It was a despairing wail. 

Don Corleone turned his back. It was a dismissal. Bonasera 
did not budge. 

Finally, sighing, a good-hearted man who cannot remain 
angry with an erring friend, Don Corleone turned back to the 
undertaker, who was now as pale as one of his corpses. Don 
Corleone was gentle, patient. ‘Why do you feat to give your 
first allegiance to me?’ he said. ‘You go to the law courts and 
wait for months. You spend money on lawyers who know full 
well you are to be made a fool of. You accept judgement from 
a judge whO' sells himself like the worst whore in the streets. 
Years gone by, when you needed money, you went to the 
banks and paid ruinous interest, waited hat in hand like a 
beggar while they sniffed aroimd, poked their noses up your 
very asshole to make sure you could pay them back.* The Don 
paused, his voice became sterner. 

‘But if you had come to me, my purse would have bec^ 
yours. If you had come to me for justice those scum who 
ruined your daughter would be weeping bitter tears this day. 
If by some misfortune an honest man like yourself made 
enemies they would become my enemies ’ - the Don raised his 
arm, finger pointing at Bonasera - ‘and then, believe me, they 
would fear you.’ 

Bonasera bowed his head and murmured in a strangled 
voice, ‘Be my friend. I accept.’ 

Don Corleone put his hand on the man’s shoulder. ‘Good,’ 
he said, ‘you shall have your justice. Some day, and that day 
may never come, 1 will call upon you to do me a service in 
return. Until that day, consider this justice a gift from my wife, 
your daughter’s godmother.’ 

When the door closed behind the grateful undertaker Don 
Corleone turned to Hagen and said, ‘Give this affair to 
Qemenza and tell him to be sure to use reliable people, people 
who will not be carried away by the smell of blood. After all, 
we’re not murderers, no matter what that corpse valet dreams 
up in his foolish head.* He noted that his first-bom, masculine 
son was gaaing through the window at the garden party. It 
was bopdess, Don Corleone thought. If he refused to be 



instructed, Santino could never run the family business, could 
never become 'a Don. He would have to find somebody else. 
And soon. After all, he was not immortal. 

From the garden, startling all three men, there came a happy 
roaring shout. Sonny Corleone pressed dose to the window. 
What he saw made him move quickly towards the door, a 
delighted smile on his face. *It’s Johnny, he came to the 
wedding, what did I tell you?* Hagen moved to the window, 
‘It’s really your godson,’ he said to Don CorlTOne. ‘Shall I 
bring him here?’ 

‘No,’ the Don said. ‘Let the people enjoy him. Let him 
come to me when he is ready.’ He smiled at Hagen. ‘You sec? 
He is a good godson.’ 

Hagen felt a twinge of jealousy. He said dryly, ‘It’s been 
twoyears. He’s probablyin trouble again and wants you to help.* 

‘And who should he come to if not his godfadier?’ asked 
Don Cotleone. 

The first one to see Johnny Fontaoe enter the garden was 
Connie Corleune. She forgot her bridal dignity and screamed, 
‘Johnece’. Then she ran into his arms. He hugged her tight 
and kissed her on the mouth, kept his arm around her as 
others came up to greet him. They were all ^s old friends, 
people he had grown up with on the West Side. Then Connie 
was dragging him to her new husband. Johnny saw with 
amusement that the blond young man looked a little sour at no 
longer being the star of the day. He turned on all his charm, 
shaking the groom’s hand, toasting him with a glass of wine. 

A familiar voice called from the bandstand, ‘How about 
giving us a song, Johnny?’ He looked up and saw Nino 
Valenti smiling down at him. Johnny Fontane jumped up on 
the bandstand and threw his arms around Nino. They had 
been inseparable, singing together, going out with girls 
together, until Johnny had started to become famous and 
sing on the radio. When he had gone to Hollywood to make 
movies Johnny had phoned Nino a couple of times just to talk 
and had promised to get him a club singing date. But he had 
never done so. Seeing Nino now, his cheerful, mocking, 
drunken grin, all the a&ction retumed. 


5 * 



Kino began stnunming on the mandolin. Johnny Fontane 
put his hand on Nino’s shoulder. ^This is for the btidc»’ he 
said, and stamping his foot, chanted the words to an obscene 
Sicilian love song. As he sang, Nino made suggestive motions 
with his body. The bride blushed proudly, the throng of 
guests roared its approval. Before the song ended they were 
ali stamping with their feet and roaring out the sly, double- 
meaning tag line that finished each stamca. At the end they 
would not stop applauding until Johnny cleared his throat to 
sing another song. 

They were all proud of him. He was of them and he had 
become a famous singer, a movie star who slept with the most 
desired women in the world. And yet he had shown proper 
respect for his Godfather by travelling three thousand ci^es to 
attend diis wedding. He still loved old friends like Nino 
Valenti. Many of the people there had seen Johrmy and Nino 
singing together when they were just boys, when no one 
dreamed that Johnny Fontane would grow up to hold the 
hearts of fifty million women in his hands. 

Johnny Fontane reached down and lifted the bride up on to 
the bandstand so that Connie stood between him and Nino. 
Both men crouched down, facing each other, Nino plucking 
the mandolin for a few harsh chords. It was an old routine of 
theirs, a mock battle and wooing, using their voices like 
swords, each shouting a chorus in turn. With the most delicate 
courtesy. Johnny let Nino’s voice overwhelm his own, let 
Nino take the bride from his arm, let Nino swing into the last 
victorious stanza while his own voice died away. The whole 
wedding party hrokeioto shouts of applause,the three of them em- 
braced each other at the end. The guests begged for another song. 

Only Don Corleone, standing in the corner entrance of the 
house, sensed something amiss. Cheerily, with bluff good 
humour, careful not to give ofience to his guests, he called 
out, ^My godson has come three thousand miles to do us 
honour and no one thinks to wet his throat?’ At once a dozen 
full wine glasses were thrust at Johnny Fontane. He took a sip 
from all and rushed to embrace his Godfisther. As he did so he 
whispered something into the older man’s ear. Don Corleone 
led hto into the house. 



Tom Hagca hdd out his band when Johnny came into the 
room. Johnny shook it and said, *How ate you, Tom?* But 
without his usual charm that consisted of a genuine warmth 
for people. Hagen was a litde hurt by this coolness, but 
shrugged it off. It was one of the penalties for being the Don’s 
hatchet man. 

Johnny Fontane said to the Don, * When 1 got the wedding 
invitation I said to myself, ^'My Godfather isn’t mad at me 
any more.” I called you five times after my divorce and Tom 
always told me you were out or busy, so I knew you were 
sore.’ 

Don Corleone was filling glasses from the yellow bottle of 
Strega. ^That’a all forgotten. Now. Can I do something for 
you still? You’re not too fismous, too rich, that 1 can’t help 
you?’ 

Johnny gulped down the yellow fiery liquid and held out his 
glass to be refilled. He tried to sound jaunty. *I’m not rich. 
Godfather. I’m going down. You were right. I should never 
have left my wife and kids for that tramp 1 married. 1 don’t 
blame you for gctdng sore at me.’ 

The Don shrugged. '1 worded about you, you’re my 
godson, that’s all.’ 

Johnny paced up and down the room. was crazy about 
that bitch. The biggest star in HoUywood. She looks like an 
angel. And you know what she does after a picture? If the 
make-up man does a good job on her face she lets him bang 
her. If the cameraman made her look extra good she brings 
him into her dressing room and gives him a screw. Anybody. 
She uses her body like 1 use the loose change m my pocket for 
a dp. A whore made for the devil.’ 

Don' Corleone curtly broke in. *How is your family?’ 

Johnny sighed. took care of them. After the divorce 1 
gave Ginny and the kids more than the courts said I should. 1 
go see them once a week. 1 miss them. Sometimes I think I’m 
going crazy.’ He took another drink. !Now my second wife 
laughs at me. She can’t understand my being jealous. She calls 
me an old-fashioned guinea, she makes fi^ of my singing. 
Before 1 left I gave ^ a beating, but not in the fiioe 
because she was making a picture. I gave her ciamps, 1 


54 



punched her on the arms and legs like a kid and she kept 
laughing at me.* He lit a cigarette. * So, Godfather, right now, 
life doe8n*t seem worth living.* 

Don Corleone said simply, ^These are troubles 1 can’t help 
you with.* He paused, then asked, ’What’s the matter ^trith 
your voice?* 

All the assured charm, the self-mockery, disappeared from 
Johnny Fontane’s face. He said almost brokenly, ’God&ther, 
I can’t sing any more, something happened to my throat, the^ 
doctors don’t know what.* Hagen and the Don leaked at him 
with surprise, Johnny had always been so tough. Fontane went 
on. ’My two pictures made a lot of money. I was a big star. 
Now they throw me out. The head of the studio always hated 
my guts, and now he’s paying mt off.* 

Don Corleone s^pod b^re his godson and asked grimly, 
’Why doesn’t this man like you?’ 

’I used to sing those songs for the liberal organkadons, you 
know, all that stuff you never liked me to do. Well, jiudk 
Waltz didn’t like it either. He called me a Communist, but he 
couldn’t make it sddr. Then I snatched a gkl he had saved for 
himself. It was stdedy a one-night stand and she came after 
me. What the hell could 1 do? Then my whore second wife 
throws me out. And Ginny and the kids won’t take me back 
unless 1 come ctawUng on my hands and knees, and I can’t 
sing any mote. God&ther, what the hell can 1 do?’ 

Don Gorleone’s fece had become cold without a hint of 
sympathy. He said contemptuously, ’You can start by acting 
like a man.’ Suddenly anger contorted his fece. He shouted. 
’LtKB A manI’ He reached over the desk and grabbed Johnny 
Fontane by the hair of his head in a gesture that was savagely 
affectionate. ’By Christ in heaven, is it possible that you spent 
so much time in presence and tuti^ out no better than 
this? A Holl 3 rwood finoetUo who weeps and begs for pity? 
Who cries out like a woman - ”Wbat shall I do? Oh, what 
shall I do?”’ 

The mimkxy of the Don was so extraordinary, so unex- 
pected, diat Hagen and Johnny were startled into laughter. 
Don Corleone was plea^. For a moment he reflected on 
how mudi he loved this godson. How would his own three 



sons have reacted to such a tongue-lashing? Sandno would 
have sulked and behaved badly for weeks afterwards. Fredo 
would have been cowed. Michael would have given him a cold 
smile and gone out of the house, not to be seen for months. 
But Johnny, ah, what a £ne chap he was, stniHng now, 
gathering strength, knowing already the true purpose of his 
Godfather. 

Don Corleone went on. ‘You took the woman of your boss, 
a man more powerful than yourself, then you complain he 
won’t help you. What nonsense. You left your family, your 
children without a fatlicr, to marry a whore and you weep 
because they don’t welcome you back with open arms. The 
whore, you don’t hit her in the face because she is making a 
picture, then you are ainaaed because she laughs at you. You 
lived Like a fool and you have come to a fool’s end.* 

Don Corleone paused to ask in a patient voice, ‘Are you 
willing to take my advice this time?’ 

Johnny Fontane shrugged. ‘I can’t marry Ginny again, not 
the way she wants. I have to gamble, 1 have to drink, I have to 
go out with the boys. Beautiful broads run after me and 1 
never could resist them. Then I used to feel like a heel when I 
went back to Ginny. Christ, 1 can’t go through all that crap 
again.’ 

It was rare that Don Corleone showed exasperation. ‘I 
didn’t tell you to get married again. Do what you want. It’s 
good you wish to be a ftther to your children. A man who is 
not a fttlicr to his children can never be a real man. But then, 
you must make their mother accept you. Who says you can’t 
see them every day? Who says you can’t live in the same 
house? Who says you can’t live your life exactly as you want to 
live it?* 

Johnny Fontane laughed. ‘Godfather, not all women arc 
like the old Italian wives. Ginny won’t stand for it.’ 

Now the Don was mocking. ‘Because you acted like a 
fifwcMe, You gave her more than the court said. You didn’t hit 
the other in the fice because she was making a picture. You 
let women dictate your actions and they are not competent in 
this world, though certainly they will be saints in heaven while 
we men bum in hell. And then I’ve watched you all these 



years.’ The Don’s voice bec^e earnest. * You’ve been a fine 
godson, you’ve given me all the respect. But what of your 
other old friends? One year you run around with this person, 
the next year with another person. That Italian boy who was so 
funny in the movies, he had some bad luck and you never saw 
him again because you were more famous. And how about 
your old, old comrade that you went to sdiool with, who was 
your partner singing? Nino. He drinks too much out of dis- 
appointment, but he never complains. He works hard driving 
the gravel truck and sings weekends for a few JoUars. He 
never says anything against you. You couldn’t help him a bit? 
Why not? He sings well.’ 

Johnny Fontane said with patient weariness, ‘Godfather, he 
just hasn’t got enough talent. He’s OK, but he’s not big 
time.’ 

Don Corlepne lidded his eyes almost closed and then said, 
‘And you, godson, you now, you just don’t have talent 
enough. ShaitI get you a job on the gravel truck with Nino?’ 
When Johnny didn’t answer, the Don went on. ‘Friendship is 
everything. Friendship is more than talent. It is mote than 
government. It is almost the equal of family. Never forget 
that. If you had built up a wall of friendships you wouldn’t 
have to ask me to help. Now tell me, why can’t you sing? You 
sang well in the garden. As well as Nino.’ 

Hagen and Johnny smiled at this delicate thrust. It was 
Johnny’s turn to be patronizingiy patient. ‘My voice is weak. 
I sing one or two songs and then I can’t sing again for hours or 
days. I can’t make it ^ough the rehearsals or the retakes. My 
voice is weak, it’s got some sort of sickdess.’ 

‘So you have woman trouble. Your voice is sick. Now tell 
me the trouble you’re having with this HoMj^ood 
who won’t let you work.’ The Don was getting down to 
business. 

‘He’s bigger than one of yom pei(;(pnopa 9 ti* Johnny said. 
‘He owns tibe studio. He advises the President on movie 
propaganda for the war. Just a month ago he bought the 
movie rights to the biggest novel of the year. A bestseller. 
And the main character is a guy just like me. 1 wouldn’t even 
have to act, just be myself. 1 w^dn’t even have to sing. 1 


57 



might even win the Academy Award. Everybody knows' it's 
p^ect for me and I^d be big again. As an actor. But that 
bastard Jack Wolta is paying me off, he won^t give it to me. 1 
ofiered to do it for nothing, for a minimi iin ptice onH be 
says no. He sent the word t^t if I come and kiss his ass in the 
studio commissary, maybe he’ll think about it.’ 

Don Corleone dismissed this emotional nonsense with a 
wave of his hand. Among reasonable men problems of 
business could always be solved. He patted his godson on the 
shoulder. * You’re discouraged. Nobody cares about you, so 
you think. And you’ve lost a lot of weight. You drink a lot, 
eh? You don’t sleep and you take pills?’ He shook his head 
disapprovingly. 

‘ Now I want you to follow my orders,’- the Don said. *I want 
you to stay in my house for one month. I want you to eat well, 
to^rest and sleep. I want you to be my companion, I enjoy 
your company, and maybe you can learn something about the 
world from your Godfather that might even help you in the 
great Hollywood. But no singing, no drinking, and no 
women. At the end of the month you can go back to Holly- 
wood and this calibre will give you that 

job you want. Done?’ 

Johnny Fontane could not altogether believe that the Don 
had such power. But his Godfather had never said such and 
such a thing could be done without having it done. ’This guy 
is a persond friend of J. Edgar Hoover,’ Johnny said. ^You 
can’t even raise your voice to him.’ 

‘He’s a businessman,’ the Don said blandly. ‘I’ll make him 
an offer he can’t refuse.’ 

‘It’s too late,’ Johnny said. ‘All the contracts have been 
signed^ and they start shooting in a week. It’s absolutely im- 
possible.’ 

Don Corleone said, ‘Go, go back to the party. Your friends 
are waiting for you. Leave everything to me.’ He pushed 
Johnny Fontane out of the room. 

Hagen sat behind the desk and made notes. The Don heaved 
a sigh and asked, ‘Is there anything else?’ 

‘Sollozzo can’t be put off any mote. You’U have to see him 
this week.’ Hagen held his pen over die calendar. 

58 



The Don shragged. *Now that the wedding k over* when- 
ever you like.’ 

This answer told Hagen two things. Most important, that 
the answer to Virgil Sollozao would be no. The second, that 
Don Corleone, since he would not give the answer before his 
daughter’s wedding, expected his no to cause trouble. 

Hagen said cautiously, * Shall 1 tell Qemen^a to have some 
men come live in the house?’ 

The Don said impatiently, ^For what? 1 didn’t answer 
before the wedding because on an important day like that 
there should be no cloud, not even in the distance. Also 1 
wanted to know beforehand what he wanted to talk about. 
We know now. What he will propose is an infamita* 

Hagen asked, ‘Then you will refuse?’ When the Don 
nodded, Hagen said, ‘I think we should all discuss it - die 
whole Family - before you give your answer.’ 

The Don smiled. ‘You think so? Good, we will discuss it. 
When you come back from Gdifomia. 1 want you to fly diere 
tomorrow and settle this business for Johnny. See that movie 
Tell S 0 II 0220 1 will see him when you get badt 
from California. Is there anything else?’ 

Hagen said formally, ‘The hospital called. 
Abbandando is dying, he won’t last out the night. His fiunily 
was told to come and wait.’ 

Hagen had filled the ConstgliotrV% post for the past year, ever 
since the cancer had imprisoned Genco Abbandando in his 
hospital bed. Now be waited to hear Don Corleone say the 
post was his permanently. The odds were against it. So high a 
position was traditionally given only to a man descended from 
two Italian parents. There had alre^y been trouble about his 
temporary performance of the duties. Also, lie was cmly 
thirty-five, not old enough, ^pposedly, to have acquired the 
necessary experience and cunning for a successful Oms^fiori. 

But the Don gave him no encouragement. He asked, ‘When 
does my daughter leave with her bridegroom?’ 

Hagen looked at his wristwatch. ‘In a few minutes tiieyHl 
cut ^ cake and then a harbour after that.’ That reminded 
him of something else. ‘Your new son-in-law. Do we give 
him something important, inside die Family?’ 



He was surprised at the vehemence of the Don^s answer. 
‘Never.* The Don hit the desk with the flat of his hand. 
‘Never. Give him something to earn his living, a good 
living. But never let him know the Family’s business. Tdl the 
others. Sonny, Frcdo, Qemen:sa.’ 

The Don paused. * Instruct my sons, all three of them, that 
they will accompany me to the hospit^ to see poor Genco. I 
want them to pay their last respects. Tell Freddie to drive the 
big car and ask Johnny if he will come with us, as a special 
favour to me.’ He saw Hagen look at him questioningly. ‘I 
want you to go to Califomia tonight. You won’t have time to 
go see Genco. But don’t leave until I come back from the 
hospital and speak with you. Under's tood ? * 

‘ Understood,’ Hagen said. * What time should Fred have the 
car waiting?’ 

* When the guests have left/ Don Corleone said. ‘Genco will 
wait for me.’ 

‘The Senator called,’ Hagen said. ‘Apologizing for not 
coming personally but that you would understand. He 
probably means these two FBI men across the street taking 
down licence numbers. But he sent his gift over by special 
messenger.’ 

The Don nodded. He did not think it necessary to mention 
that he himself had warned the Senator not to come. ‘Did he 
send a nice present?’ 

Hagen made a face of impressed approval that was very 
strangely Italian on his German-Irish features. ‘Antique 
silver, very valuable. The kids can sell it for a grand at least. 
The Senator spent a lot of time getting exactly the right thing. 
For those kind of people that’s more important than how 
much it costs.’ 

Don Corleohe did not hide his pleasure that so great a man 
as the Senator had shown him such respect. The Senator, like 
Luca Brasi, was one of the great stones in the Don's power 
structure, and he too, with this gift, had reswom his 
loyalty. 

When Johnny Fontane appeared in the garden Kay Adams 
recognized him immediately. She was truly surprise. ‘You 


40 



never told me your fimiily knew Johnny Fontane,’ she said. 
‘Now I’m sure I’ll marry you.’ 

‘Do you want to meet him?* Michael asked. 

‘Not now/ Kay said. She sighed. ‘I was in love with him 
for three years. I used lo come down to New York whenever 
he sang at the Capitol and scream my head o£F. He was so 
wonderful.* 

‘We’ll meet him later/ Michael said. 

When Johnny finished singing and vanished into the house 
with Don Corlcone, Kay said archly to Michael, ‘Don’t tell 
me a big movie star like Johnny Fontane has to ask your 
father for a favour?’ 

‘He’s my father’s godson/ Michael said. ‘And if it wasn’t 
for my father he might not be a big movie star today.’ 

Kay Adams laughed with delight. ‘That sounds like another 
great story.’ 

Michael shook his head. ‘I can’t teU that one/ he said. 

‘Trust me,’ she said. 

He told her. He told her without being funny. He told it 
without pride. He told it without any sort of explanation 
except that eight years before his father had been more 
impetuous, and because the matter concerned his godson, 
the Don considered it an afiair of personal honour. 

The story was quickly told. Eight years ago Johnny Fontane 
had made an extraordinary success singing with a popular 
dance band. He had become a top radio attraction. Unfor- 
tunately the band leader, a well-known show business per- 
sonality named Les Halley, had signed Johnny to a five-year 
persoi^ services contract. It was a common show-business 
practice. Les Halley could now loan Johnny out and pocket 
most of the money. 

Don Codeone entered the negotiations personally. He 
ofiered Les Halley twenty thousand dollars to release Johnny 
Fontane horn the personal services contract. Halley o^ered to 
take only fifty per cent of Johnny’s earnings. Don Corlcone 
was amused. He dropped his offer from twenty thousand 
doUars to ten thousand dollars. The band leader, obviously 
not a man of the world outside his beloved show business, com- 
tdetely missed the -significance of this lower ofier. He rdfused. 


41 



The next day Don Cotleone went to see the band leader 
personally. He brought with him his two best friends, 
Genco Abbandando, who was his Consigliori^ and Luca Brasi. 
With no other witnesses Don Corleone persuaded Les Halley 
to sign a document giving up all rights to all services from 
Johnny Fontane upon payment of a certified cheque to the 
amount of ten thousand dollars. Don Corleone did this by 
putting a pistol to the forehead of the band leader and assuring 
him with the utmost seriousness that either his signature or his 
brains would rest on that document in exactly one minute. 
Les Halley signed. Don Corleone pocketed his pistol and 
handed over the certified cheque. 

The rest was history. Johnny Fontane went on to become 
the greatest singing sensation in the country. He made Holly- 
wood musicals that earned a fortune for his studio. His 
records made millions of dollars. Then he divorced his child- 
hood-sweetheart wife and lefr his two children, to marry the 
most glamorous blonde star in motion pictures. He soon 
learned that she was a ‘whore*. He drank, he gambled, he 
chased other women. He lost his singing voice. His records 
stopped selling. The studio did not renew his contract. And 
so now he had come back to his Godfrther. 

Kay said thoughtfully, ‘Are you sure you’re not jealous of 
your father? Everything you’ve told me about him shows him 
doing something for other people. He must be good-hearted.’ 
She smiled wryly. ‘Of course his methods are not exactly 
constitutional.’ 

Michael sighed. *I guess that’s the way it sounds, but let me 
tell you this. You Imow those Arctic explorers who leave 
caches of food scattered on the route to the North Pole? 
Just in case they may need diem some day? That’s my 
father’s frvours. Some day he’ll be at each one of those 
people’s houses and diey had better come across.’ 

It was nearly twilight before the wedding cake was shown, 
exclaimed over, and eaten. Specially baked by Nazorine, it was 
deverly decorated with shells of cream so dizzyingly ddidous 
diat die bdde greedily plucked them from the corpse of the 
cake befi^re she whiwied away on her honeymoon with her 
blond groom. The Don policy sped his* guests’ dqsartore. 


4 * 



nodng meanwhile that the black sedan with its FBI men was 
no longer visible. 

Finally, the only car left in the driveway was the long black 
Cadillac with Freddie at the wheeL^The Don got into the front 
seat, moving with quick coordination for his age and bulk. 
Sonny, Michael, and Johnny Fontane got into the back seat. 
Don Corleone said to his son Michael, ‘Your girlfriend, she’ll 
get back to the city by herself all right?’ 

Michael nodded. ‘Tom said he’d take care of it.’ Don 
(^rleone nodded with satisfaction at Hagen’s efficiency. 

Because of the gas rationing still in efiect, there was little 
traffic on the Belt Parkway to Manhattan. In less than an hour 
the Cadillac rolled into the street of French Hospital. During 
the ride Don Corleone asked his youngest son if he was doing 
well in school. Michael nodded. Then Sonny in the back scat 
asked his father, ‘Johnny says you’re getting him squared 
away with that Hollywood business. Do you want me to go 
out there and help?’ 

Don Corleone was curt. ‘Tom is going tonight. He won’t 
need any help, it’s a simple aftiir.’ 

Sonny Corleone laughed. ‘Johnny thinks you can’t fix it, 
that’s why 1 thought you might want me to go out there.’ 

Don Corleone turned his head. ‘Why do you doubt me?’ he 
asked Johnny Fontane. ‘Hasn’t your Godfrther always done 
what he said he would do? Have 1 ever been taken for afool?’ 

Johnny apologized nervously. ‘Godfather, the man who 
runs it is a .90 calibre pa^nmf€mt 9 . You can’t budge him, 

not even with money. He has big connexions. And he hates 
me. 1 just don’t know how you can swing it.’ 

The Don spoke with affectionate amusement. ‘1 say to you: 
you shall have it.’ He nudged Michael with his elbow. ‘We 
won’t disappoint my godson, eh, Michael?’ 

Michael, who never doubted his &ther for a moment, shook 
his head. 

As they walked towards the hospital entrance, Don Cor- 
leone put his hand on Michael’s arm so that the o^ers forged 
ahead. ‘When you get through with college, come and talk to 
me,’ the Don said. ‘1 have some plans you will like.’ 

Michael didn’t say anything. Don Corleone grunted in 


45 



exasperation. know how you ate. 1 won’t ask you to do 
anything you don’t approve of. This is something special. Go 
your own way now, you’re a man after all. But come to me as a 
son should when you have finished with your schooling.’ 

The family of Gcnco Abbandando, wife and three daughters 
dressed in black, clustered like a flock of plump crows on the 
white tile floor of tlie hospital corridor. When they saw Don 
Corleone come out of the elevatoi they seemed to flutter up 
off the white tiles in an instinctive surge towards him for 
protection. The mother was regally stout in black, the 
daughters fat and plain. Mrs Abbandando pecked at Don 
Corleone’s cheek, sobbing, wailing, ‘ Oh, what a saint you arc, 
to come here on your daughter’s wedding day.* 

Don Corleone brushed these thanks aside. ‘Don’t I owe 
respect to such a friend, a friend who has been my right arm 
for twenty years?’ He had understood immediately that the 
soon-to-be widow did not comprehend that her husband 
would die this night. Genco Abbandando had been in this 
hospital for nearly a year dying of his cancer and the wife had 
come to consider his fatal illness almost an ordinary part of 
life. Tonight was just another crisis. She babbled on. ‘Go in 
and see my poor husband,’ she said, ‘he asks for you. Poor, 
man, he wanted to come to the wedding to show his respect, 
but the doctor would not permit it. Then he said you would 
come to see him on this great day, but I did not believe it 
possible. Ah, men understand friendship more than we 
women. Go inside, you will make him happy.’ 

A nurse and a doctor came out of Genco Abbandando’s 
private room. The doctor was a young man, serious-faced and 
with the air of one born to command, that is to say, the air of 
one who has been immensely rich all his life. One of the 
daughters asked timidly, ‘ Dr Kennedy, can we go to see him 
now?’ 

Dr Kennedy looked over the large group with exasperation. 
Didn’t these people rcalixe that the man inside was dying 
and dying in torturous pain? It would be much better if every- 
one let him die in peace. ‘I think just the immediate family/ 
he said in his exquisitely polite voice. He was surprised 



when the wife and daughters turned to the short, heavy man 
dressed in an awkwardly £tted tuxedo, as if to hear his 
decision. * 

The heavy man spoke. There was just the slightest trace of 
an Italian accent in his voice. "My dear doaor,’ said Don 
Corleone, " is it true he is dying? ’ 

"Yes/ said Dt Kennedy. 

"Then there is nothing more for you to do/ said Don 
Corleone. "We will take up the burden. We wiD comfort him. 
We will dose his eyes. We will bury him and weep at his 
funeral and afterwards we will watch over his wife and 
daughters.’ At hearing things put so bluntly, forcing her to 
understand, Mrs Abbandando ^gan to weep. 

Dr Kennedy shrugged. It was impossible to explain to these 
peasants. At the same time he recognized the crude justice in 
the man’s remarks. His role was over. Still exquisitely polite, 
he said, "Please wait for the nurse to let you in, she has a few 
necessary things to do with the patient.’ He walked away from 
them down the corridor, his white coat flapping. 

The nurse went back into the room and they waited. Finally 
she came out again, holding the door for them to enter. She 
whispered, ‘He’s delirious with the pain and fever, try not to 
exdte him. And you can stay only a few minutes, except for the 
wife.’ She recognized Johnny Fontane as he went by her and 
her eyes opened wide. He gave her a faint smile of acknow- 
ledgement and she stared at him with frank invitation. He fled 
her away for future reference, then followed the others into 
the sick man’s room. 

Genco Abbandando had run a long race with death, and 
now, vanquished, he lay exhausted on the raised bed. He was 
wasted away to no more than a skdeton, and what had once 
been vigorous black hair had turned into obscene stringy 
wisps. Don Corleone said cheerily, "Genco, dear friend, I have 
brought my sons to pay their respects, and look, even Johnny 
all the way from Hollywood.’ 

The dying man raised his fevered eyes gratefully to the Don. 
He let the young men clasp his bony hand in their fleshy ones. 
His wife and daughters ranged themsdves along his bed, 
kissing his cheek, taking his other hand in turn. 


45 



The Don pressed his old fidend’s hincL He said comfort- 
ingly, *Hurry up and get better and well take a trip to Italy 
tog^et to our old village. We’ll play bom$ in frcmt of the 
wineshop like our fiithets before us.’ 

The dying man shook his head, fie motioned the young 
men and his fiunily away from his bedside; widi the other 
bony daw he hung fast to the Don. He tri^ to speak. The 
Don put his head down and then sat on the bedside chair. 
Genco Abbandando was babbling about their childhood. 
Then his coal-black eyes became sly. He whispered. The Don 
bent doser. The others in the room were astonished to see 
tears running down Don Corleone’s free as he shook his head. 
The quavering voice grew louder, filling the room. With a 
tortured, superhuman effort, Abbandando lifted his head off 
his pillow, eyes unseeing, and pointed a skeletal forefinger at 
the Don. ^Godfather, Godfather,’ he called out blindly, ’save 
me from death, 1 beg of you. I^y flesh is burning off my bones 
and 1 can fed the worms eating away my brain. Godfrther, 
cure me, you have the power, dry the tears of my poor wife. 
In Corleone we played together as children, and now wiU you 
let me die when 1 fear hell for my sins?’ 

The Don was silent. Abbandando said, ’It is your daughter’s 
wedding day, you cannot refuse me.’ 

The Don spoke quietly, gravdy, to pierce through the 
blasphemous delirium. ’Old friend,’ he said, ’1 have no such 
powers. If I did I would be more merciful than God, believe 
me. But don’t fear death and don’t fear hell. I will have a mass 
said for your soul every night and every morning. Your wife 
and your children will pray for you. How can God punish you 
with so many pleas for mercy?’ 

The skeleton face took on a cunning expression that was 
obscene. Abbandando said slyly, 'It’s been arranged then?’ 

When the Don answered, his voice was cold, without 
comfort. ’You blaspheme. Resign yourself.’ 

Abbandando fell back on the pillow. His eyes lost their wild 
gleam of hope. The nurse came back into the room and started 
shooing them out in a very matter-of-fret way. The Don got 
up, but Abbandando put out his hand. ’GoeflEsther,’ he said, 
’stay here with me and help me meet death. Perhaps if He sees 

46 



you neair me He vnU be filghteiied and leave me in peace. Or 
perhaps you can say a word, puU a few strings, eh?* The 
dying man winked as if he were mocking the Don, now not 
really serious. ^You’re brothers in blood, after all.’ Iben, as if 
feadng the Don would be offended, he clutched at his hand. 
*Stay with me, let me hold your hand. We’ll outwit that 
bastard as we’ve outwitted others. Godfether, don’t betray me.* 

The Don motioned the other people out of the room. They 
left. He took the withered claw of Genco Abbandando in his 
own two broad hands. Softly, reassuringly, he comforted his 
friend, as they waited for deadi together. As if the Don could 
truly snatch the life, of Genco Abbandando back from that 
most foul and criminal traitor to man. 

The wedding day of Connie Corleone ended well for her. 
Carlo Bjzsd performed his duties as a bridegroom with skill 
and vigour, spurred on by the contents of the bride’s gift purse 
which totall^ up to over twenty thousand dolbrs. The 
bride, however, gave up her virginity^ with a great deal more 
willingness than she gave up her purse. For the latter, he had 
to blacken one of her eyes. 

Lucy Mancini waited in her house for a call from Sonny 
Corleone, sure that he would ask her for a date. Finally she 
called his house and whenshe heard a woman’s voice answer the 
phoneshehungup. Shehadno way ofknowing that nearly every- 
one at the wedding had remarked the absence of her and Sonny 
for that fatal half hour and the gossip was already spreading 
that Santino Corleone had found another victim. That he 
had Mone the job’ on his own sister’s maid of honour. 

Amerigo Donasera had a terrible nightmare. In his dreams 
he saw Don Corleone, in peaked cap, overalls,’and heavy 
gloves, unloading bullet-riddled corpses in front of his funeral 
parlour and shouting, * Remember, Amerigo, not a word to 
anyone, and bury them quickly.’ He groaned so loudandlong in 
his sleep that his wife shook him awake. *Eh, what a man you 
are,’ she grumbled. * To have a nightmare only after a wedding. ’ 

Kay Adams was escorted to her New York City hotel by 
PauUe Gatto and Qdnenaa. The car was large, luxurious, and 
driven by Gatto. Qemenza sat in the back seat and Kay was 


47 



gived the front seat next to the ddver. She found both men 
wildly exotic. Their speech ^was movie Brooklynese and they 
treated her with exaggerated courtliness. Duri^ the ride she 
chatted casually with both men and was surprised when they 
spoke of Michael with unmistakable a£Fection and tespect. He 
had led het to believe* that he was an alien in his fafoer*s 
world. Now Clemenxa was assuring her in his wheeaing 
guttural voice that the ‘old man* thought Mike was the best of 
his sons, the one who would surely inherit the fiimily business. 

‘ What business is that ? ’ Kay asked in the most natural way. 

Paulie Gatto gave hei* a quick glance as he turned the 
wheel. Behind her Qemenza said in a surprised voice. ‘Dida*t 
Mike tell you? Mr Q>rleone is the biggest importer of Italian 
olive oil in the States. Now that the war is over the business 
could get real rich. He*ll need a smart boy like Mike.’ 

At the hotel Clemenxa insisted on coming to the desk with 
het. When she protested, he said simply, ‘The boss said to 
make sure you got home OK. I gotta do it.* 

After she received her room key he walked her to the 
elevator and waited until she got in. She waved to him, 
smiling, and was surprised at his genuine smile of pleasure in 
return. It was just as well she did not see him go iMck to the 
hotel clerk and ask, ‘ What name she registered under?* 

Tlic hotel clerk looked at Qemenza coldly. Qemenza rolled 
the little green spitball he was holding in his hand across to the 
clerk, who picked it up and immediately said, ‘Mr and Mrs 
Michael Corleone.* 

Back in the car, Paulie Gatto said, ‘Nice dame.* 

Qemenza grunted. ‘ Mike is doing the job on her.’ Unless, 
he thought, they were really married. ‘Pick me up early in the 
morning,* he told Paulie. G^tto. ‘Hagen got some deal for us 
that gotta be done tight away.’ 

It was late Sunday night before Tom Hagen could kiss his 
wife goodbye and drive out to the airport. With his special 
number one priority (a grateful gift ftom a Pentagon staff 
general ofHcer) he no trouble getting on a plane to Los 
Angeles. 

It had been a busy but satisfying day for Tom Hagen. Genco 

48 



AbbaddAndo had died at three in the morning and when Don 
Corleonc returned from the hospital, he had informed Hagen 
that he wsa now officially the new ConsigHm to the fitmily. 
This meant that Hagen was sure to become a very xidi man, to 
say nothing of power* 

The Don had broken a long-standing ttadition. The 
Consiglim was always a full-blooded Sicilian, and the fact that 
Hagen had been brought up as a member of the Don’s family 
made no difierence to that tradition. It was a question of blood- 
Only a Sicilian bom to the ways of omerta^ the law of silence, 
could be trusted in the key post of Consigliori. 

Between the head of the fiunily, Don G>rleone, who dic- 
tated policy, and the operating krel of men who actually 
carried out ^e orders of the Don, there were three layers, or 
bufiers. In that way nothing could be traced to the top. Unless 
the Consigli&ri turned traitor. That Sunday morning Don 
Corleone gave explicit instructions on what should be done to 
the two young men who hsul beaten the daughter of Amerigo 
Bonasera. But he had given those orders in private to Tom 
Hagen. Later in the day Hagen had, also in private without 
witnesses, instructed Oemenaa. In turn Oememai had told 
Paulie Gatto to execute the commission. Paulie Gatto would 
now muster the necessary manpower and execute the orders. 
Paulie Gatto and his men would not know why this particular 
task was being carried out or who had ordered it originally. 
Each link of the chain would have to turn traitor for the Don 
to be involved and though it had never yet happened, there 
was always the possibility. The cure for that possibility also 
was known. Only one link in the chain had to ^sappear. 

The Cmmgiiori was also what his name implied. JFie was the 
counsellor to the Don, his right-hand man, his aui^iary brain. 
He was also hiS closest companion and his closest friend. On 
important trips he would drive the Don’s car, at conferences 
he would go out and get the Don refreshments, codec and 
sandwiches, fresh cigars. He would know everything the Don 
knew or nearly everything, all the cells of power. He was the 
one man in the world who could bring the Don crashing down 
to destruction. But no CMsigfim had ever betrayed a Don, not 
in the memory of any of the powerful Sicilian fisimilies who had 


49 



estibliilied tfaemtelyes in Afnedcm. Tl^ 

And every CmuigUm knew that if he kept the 6ddi, be would 
become licfa, wkdd power, and win reipect. If miifortune 
came, his wife and children would be sheltered and cared £6t 
as if ^ were alhre or free. I/Jk kgpt /fe ftM. 

In some matters die Cmsigfhri had to act for his Don in a 
more open way and yet not involve his principal. Hagen was 
flying to Qdifotnia on just such a matter. He realhsed that his 
career as Cmmglkri woidd be seriously affxted by the success 
or feihire of this mission. By femily business standards whether 
Johnny Fontane got his coveted part in the war movie^ or did 
no^ was a minor matter. Far more important was the meeting 
Hagen had set- up with Virgil SoUosbeo the following Friday. 
But Hagen knew that to the Don, both were of equal impor- 
tance, which setded the matter for any good Consig^ori. 

The piston plane shook Tom Hagen’s already nervous in- 
sides and he ordered a martini from the hostess to quiet them. 
Both the Don and Johnny had briefed him on die character of 
the movie producer. Jack Wdka. From everything that Johnny 
said, Hagen knew he would never be able to persuade Wolta. 
But he also had no doubt whatsoever that the Don would keep 
his promise to Johnny; His own role was that of negotiator 
and contact. 

Lying back in his seat, Hagen went over all the information 
given to him that day. Jack Woita was one of the three most 
important movie producecs in Hollywood, owner of his own 
studio with doaens of stars under conttact. He wis on the 
President of the United States* Advisory Council for War 
Information, Cinematic Division, which meant simply that he 
helped make propaganda movie^ He had had dinner at the 
White flouse. He had entertained J. Edgar Hoover in his 
Hollywood home. But none of this was as impressive as it 
sounded. They were all oflSdal relationships. Woltz didn’thave 
any personal political power, mainly because he was an 
extreme reactionary, pa^y because he was a m^alomaniac 
who loved to wield power wildly without regard to the feet 
that by so doing legions of enmics sprang up out of the 
ground. 

Hagen sighed. There would be no way to * handle’ Jadt 

JO 



Wolt2. He opened his briefcase and tried to get some paper 
work done, but he was too tired. He ordered another martini 
and reflected on his life. He had no regrets, indeed he felt that 
he had been extremely lucky. Whatever the reason, the course 
he had chosen ten years ago had proved to be right for him. 
He was successful, he was as happy as any grown man could 
reasonably expect, and he found life interesting. 

Tom Hagen was thirty-five years old, a tall crew-cut man, 
very slender, very ordinary-looking. He was a lawyer but did 
not do the actual detailed legal work for the Corleone family 
business though he had practised law for three years after 
passing the bar exsm. 

At the age of eleven he had been a playmate of eleven-year 
old Sonny Corleone. Hagen’s mother had gone blind and then 
died during his eleventh year. Hagen’s father, a heavy drinker, 
had become a hopeless drunkard. A hard-working carpenter, 
he had never done a dishonest thing in his life. But his drinking 
destroyed his family and finally killed him. Tom Hagen was 
left an orphan who wandered the streets and slept in hallways. 
His younger sister had been put in a foster home, but in the 
1 920s the social agencies did not follow up cases of twelve- 
year-old boys who were so ungrateful as to run from their 
charity. Hagen, too, had an eye infection. Neighbours whis- 
pered that he had caught or inherited it from his mother and so 
therefore it could be caught from him. He was shunned. Sonny 
Corleone, a warmhearted and imperious eleven-year-old, had 
brought his friend home and demanded that he be taken in. 
Tom Hagen was given a hot dish of spaghetti with oily rich 
tomato sauce, the taste of which he had never forgotten, and 
then given a metal folding bed to sleep on. « 

In the most natural way, without a word being spoken or 
the matter discussed in any feshion, Don Corleone had per- 
mitted the boy to stay in his household. Don Corleone himself 
took the boy to a special doctor and had his eye infection 
cured. He sent him to college and law school. In all this the 
Don acted not as a father but rather as a guardian. There was 
no show of afiection but oddly enough the Don treated Hagen 
more courteously than his own sons, did not impose a parental 
will upon him. It was the boy’s decision to go tp law school 





after college. He bad heard Don G>rleoiie say once, lawyer 
with his briefcase can steal more than a hundred men with 
guns.’ Meanwhile, much to the annoyance of their father. 
Sonny and Freddie insisted on going into the family business 
after graduation from high school. Only Michael had gone on 
to college, and he had enlisted in the Marines the day after 
Pearl Harbor. 

After he passed the bar eaatn, Hagen married to start his 
own family. The bride was a young Italian girl from New 
Jersey, rare at that time for being a college graduate. After the 
wedding, which was of course held in the home of Don 
Corlcone, the Don offered to support Hagen in any under- 
taking he desired, to send him law clients, furnish his oftice, 
start him in real estate. 

Tom Hagen had bowed his head and said to the Don, ’I 
would like to work for you.’ 

The Don was surprised, yet pleased. ‘You know who I am? ’ 
he asked. 

Hagen nodded. He hadn’t really known the extent of the 
Don’s power, not then. He did not really know m the ten 
years that followed until he was made the acting Consiguori 
after Genco Abbandando became ill. But he nodded and met 
the Don’s eyes with his own. ‘I would work for you like your 
sons,’ Hagen said, meaning with complete loyalty, with com- 
plete acceptance of the Don’s parental divinity. The Don, with 
that understanding which was even then building the legend 
of his greatness, showed the young man the first mark ofr 
fstherly affection since he had come into his household. He 
took Hagen into his arms for a quick embrace and afterwards 
treated him more like a true son, though he would sometimes 
say, ‘Tbm, never forget your parents,’ as if he were reminding 
himself as well as Hagen. 

There was no chance that Hagen would forget. His mother 
had been near moronic and slovenly, so ridden by anaemia she 
could not feel affection for her children or make a pretence of 
it. His father Hagen had hated. His mother’s blindness before 
she died had terriff ed him and his own eye infection had been a 
stroke of doom. He had been sure he would go blind. When 
his father died, Tom Hagen’s eleven-year-old mind had 


54 



snapped in a curious way. He had roamed the streets like an 
animal waiting for death until the fateful day Sonny found him 
sleeping in the back of a hallway and brought him to his home. 
What had happened afterwards was a miracle. But for years 
Hagen had had nightmares, dreaming he had grown to man- 
hood blind, tapping a white cane, his blind children behind 
him tap-tapping with their little white canes as they begged in 
the streets. Some mornings when he woke the face of Don 
Q>rlcone was imprinted on his brain in that first conscious 
moment and he would feel safe. 

But the Don had insisted that he put in three years of general 
law practice in addition to his duties for the family business. 
This experience had proved invaluable later on, and also re- 
moved any doubts in Hagen’s mind about working for Don 
Corleone. He had then spent two years of training in the offices 
of a top firm of criminal law'yers in which the Don had some 
influence. It was apparent to everyone that he had a flair for 
this branch of the law. He did well and when be went into the 
full-time service of the family business, Don Corleone had not 
been able to reproach him once in the six years that followed. 

When he had been made the acting Consigliori, the other 
powerful Sicilian families referred contemptuously to the Cor- 
leone family as the * Irish gang’. This had amused Hagen. It 
had also taught him that he could never hope to succeed the 
Don as the head of the fiunily business. But he was content. 
That had never been his goal, such an ambition would have 
been a 'disrespect’ to his benefiictor and his benefactor’s 
blood family. 

It was still dark when the plane landed in Loa Angeles. 
Hagen checked into his hotel, showered and shaved, and 
watclied dawn come over the dty. He ordered breakfast and 
newspapers to be sent up to his room and relaxed undl it was 
time for his ten am appointment with Jack Woltz. The ap- 
pointment had been surprisingly easy to make. 

The day before, Hagen had c^ed the most powerful man in 
the movie labour unions, a man named Billy Gofl. Acting on 
instructions from Don Corleone, Hagen had told Go£F to 
arrange an appointment on the next day for Hagen to call on 


55 



Jack Woltz, that he should hint to Woltz diat if Hagen was not 
made happy by the results of the interview, there could be a 
labour strike at the movie studio. An hour later Hagen re- 
ceived a call from Goff. The appointment would be at ten 
AM. Woltz had got the message about the possible labour 
strike but hadn’t seemed too impressed, GofiF said. He added, 
‘If it really comes down to tl:^t, 1 gotta talk to the Don 
myself.’ 

‘If it comes to that he’ll talk to you,’ Hagen said. By saying 
this he avoided making any promises. He was not surprised 
that GoflF was so agreeable to the Don’s wishes. The family 
empire, technically, did not extend beyond the New York area 
but Don CorleoiiC had first become strong by helping labour 
leaders. Many of them still owed him debts of friendship. 

But the ten am appointment was a bad sign. It meant that he 
would be first on the appointment list, that he would not be 
invited to lunch. It meant that Woltz held him in small worth. 
Goff had not been threatening enough, probably because 
Woltz had him on his graft payroll. And sometimes the Don’s 
success in keeping himself out of the limelight worked to the 
disadvantage of the family business, in that his name did not 
mean anything to outside circles. 

His analysis proved correct. Woltz kept him waiting for a 
half liour past the appointed time. Hagen didn’t mind. The 
reception room was very plush, very comfortable, and on a 
plum-coloured couch opposite him sat the most beautiful child 
Hagen had ever seen. She was no more than eleven or twelve, 
dressed in a very expensive but simple way as a grown woman. 
She had incredibly golden hair, huge deep sea-blue eyes and a 
fresh raspberry-red mouth. She was guarded by a woman 
obviously her mother, who tried to stare Hagen down with a 
cold arrogance that made him want to punch her in the face. 
The angel child and the dragon mother, Hagen thought, 
returning the mother’s cold stare. 

Finally an exquisitely dressed but stout middle-aged woman 
came to lead him through a string of offices to the office-apart- 
ment of the movie producer. Hagen was impressed by the 
beauty of the offices and the people working in them. He 
smiled. They were all shrewdies, trying to get their foot in the 


54 



movie door by taking office jobs, and most of them would 
work in these offices for the rest of their lives or until they 
accepted defeat and returned to their home towns. 

Jack Woltz was a tall, powerfully built man with a heavy 
paunch almost concealed by his perfectly tailored suit. Hagen 
knew his history. At ten years of age Woltz had hustled empty 
beer kegs and pushcarts on the East Side. At twenty he helped 
his father sweat garment workers. At thirty he had left New 
York and moved West, invested in the nickelodeon, and 
pioneered motion pictures. At forty-eight he had been the 
most powerful movie magnate in Hollywood, still rough- 
spoken, rapaciously amorous, a raging wolf ravaging helpless 
flocks of young starlets. At fifty he transformed himself. He 
took speech lessons, learned how to dress from an English 
valet, and how to behave socially from an English buder. 
When his first wife died he married a world-famous and beaud- 
ful actress who didn’t like acting. Now at the age of sixty he 
collected old master paintings, was a member of the President’s 
Advisory Committee, and had set up a multimillion-doUar 
foimdadon in his name to promote art in modon pictures. His 
daughter had married an English lord, his son an Italian 
princess. 

His latest passion, as reported dutifully by every movie 
columnist in America, was his own racing stables on which he 
had spent ten million dollars in the past year. He had made 
headlines by purchasing the funed English racing horse 
Khartoum for the incredible price of six hundred thousand 
dollars and then announcing that the undefeated racer would 
be retired and put to stud exclusively for the Woltz stables. 

He received Hagen courteously, his beautifi^y, evenly 
tanned, meticulously barbered flsce contorted with a grimace 
meant to be a smile. Despite all the money spent, despite die 
ministradons of the most knowledgeable technicians, his age 
showed; the flesh of his face looked as if it had been seamed 
together. But there was an enormous vitality in his movements 
and he had what Don Corleone had, the air of a man who 
commanded absolutely the world in which he lived. 

Hagen came direedy to the point. That he was an emissary 
ftx>m a fnend of Johnny Fontane. That this friend was a very 


55 



powerful man who would pledge his gratitude and undying 
friendship to Mr Woitz if Mr Woltz would grant a small 
favour. The small favour would be the casting of Johnny 
Fontane in the new war movie the studio planned to start next 
week. 

The seamed face was impassive^ polite. ‘What favours can 
your friend do me?’ Woltz asked. There was just a trace of 
condescension in his voice. 

Hagen ignored the condescension. He explained. ‘You’ve 
got some labour trouble coming up. My friend can absolutely 
guarantee to make that trouble disappear. You have a top 
malc'star who makes a lot of money for your studio but he just 
graduated from marijuana to heroin. My friend wili guarantee 
that your male star won’t be able to get any more heroin. And 
if some other little thmgs come up over the years a phone call 
to me can solve your problems.’ 

Jack Woltz listened to this as if he were hearmg the boasting 
of a child. Then he said harshly, his voice deliberately ail Bast 
Side, ‘You trying to put muscle on me?’ 

Hagen said coolly, ‘Absolutely not. I’ve come to ask a 
service for a friend. I’ve tried to explain that you won’t lose 
an 3 rthing by it.* 

Almost as if he willed it, Woltz made his face a mask of 
anger. The mouth curled, his heavy brows, dyed black, con- 
tracted to form a thick line over his glinting eyes. He leaned 
over the desk towards Hagen. ‘All right, you smooth son of a 
bitch, let me lay it on the line for you and your boss, whoever 
he is. Johnny Fontane never gets that movie. I don’t care how 
many guinea Mafia goombahs come out of the woodwork.' 
He leaned back. ‘A word of advice to you, my friend. J. Edgar 
Hoovcf, 1 assume you’ve heard of him ’ - Woltz smiled sar- 
donically - ' IS a personal friend of mine. If I let him know I’m 
being pressured, you guys will never know what hit you.’ 

Hagen listened patiently. He had expected better from a man 
of Woltz’s stature. Was it possible that a man who acted this 
stupidly could rise to the head of a company worth hundreds 
of millions ? That was something to think about since the Don 
was looking for new things to put money into, and if the top 
brains of this industry were so dumb, movies might be the 

56 



thing. The abuse itself bothered him not at all. Hagen had 
learned the art of negotiation from the Don himself. ‘ Nevet 
get angry,’ the Don had instructed. ‘Never make a threat. 
Reason with people.’ The word ‘reason’ sounded so much 
bettei in Italian, rajmahy to rejom. The art of dus was to ignore 
all insults, all threats; to turn the othet cheek. Hagen had seeii 
the Don sii at a negotiating table for eight hours, swallowing 
insults, trying to persuade a notorious and megalomaniac 
strong-arm man to mend his ways. At the end of the eight 
hours Don Corleone had thrown up his hands in a helpless 
gesture and said to the other men at the table, ‘ But no one can 
reason with this fellow,’ and had stalked out of the meeting 
room. The strong-arm man had turned white with fear, 
tsmis&aries were sent to bring the I^ori back into the room. An 
agreement was reached but two months later the strong-arm 
man was shot to death in his favourite barbershop. 

So Plagen started again, speaking in the most ordinary voice. 
‘Look at my card,’ he said. ‘I’m a lawyer. Would I stick my 
neck out? Have I uttered one threatening word? Let me just 
say that I am prepared to meet any condition you name to get 
Johnny Fontane that movie. 1 think I’ve already offered a great 
deal for such a small favour. A favour that I understand it 
would be in your interest to grant. Johnny tells me that you 
admit he would be perfect for that part. And let me say that 
this favour would never be asked if that were not so. In fact, if 
you're worried about your investment, my client would 
finance the picture. But please let me make myself absolutely 
clear. Wc understand your no is no. Nobody can force you or 
is trying to. Wc know about your friendship with Mr Hoover, 
I may add, and my boss respects you for it. He respects that 
relationship very much.’ 

Woltz had been doodling with a huge, red-feathered pen. At 
the mention of money his interest was aroused and he stopped 
doodling. He said patronizingly, ‘This picture is budgeted at 
five million.’ 

Hagen whistled softly to show that he was impressed. Then 
he said very casually, ‘My boss has a lot of friends who back 
his judgement.’ 

For the first time Woltz seemed to take the whole thing 

57 



seriously. He studied Hagen’s card. ‘I never heard of you/ he 
said. ‘I know most of the big lawyers in New York, but just 
who the hell are you?’ 

‘I have one of those dignified corporate practices,’ Hagen 
said dryly. ‘I just handle this one account.’ He rose, ‘I won’t 
take up any more of your time.’ He held out his hand, Woltz 
shook it. Hagen took a few steps towards the door and turned 
to face Woltz again. ‘ I understand you have to deal with a lot 
of people who try to seem more important than they are. In 
my case the reverse is true. Why don’t you check me out with 
our mutual friend? If you reconsider, call me at my hotel.* He 
paused. ‘This may be sacrilege to you, but my client can do 
things for you that even Mr Hoover might find out of his 
range.* He saw the movie producer’s eyes narrowing. Woltz 
was finally getting the message. ‘By the way, 1 admire your 
pictures very much,’ Hagen said in the most fawning voice he 
could manage. ‘I hope you can keep up the good work. Our 
country needs it.* 

Late that afternoon Hagen received a call from the pro- 
ducer’s secretary that a car would pick him up within the hour 
to take him out to Mr Woltz’s country home for dinner. She 
told him it would be about a three-hour drive but that the car 
was equipped with a bar and some hors d’oeuvres. Hagen 
knew that Woltz made the trip in his private plane and 
wondered why he hadn’t been invited to make the trip by air. 
The secretary’s voice was adding politely, ‘ Mr Woltz suggested 
you bring an overnight bag and he’ll get you to the airport in 
the morning.’ 

‘I’ll do that,’ Hagen said. That was another thing to wonder 
about. How did Woltz know he was taking the morning plane 
back tb New York? He thought about it for a moment. The 
most likely explanation was that Woltz had set private de- 
tectives on his trail to get all possible information. Then Woltz 
certainly knew he represent^ the Don, which meant that he 
knew something about the Don, which in turn meant that he 
was now ready to take the whole matter seriously. Something 
might be done after all, Hagen thought. And maybe Woltz 
was smarter than he had appoired this morning. 



The home of Jack Wolt 2 looked likc^ an implausible movie 
set. There was a plantation-type mansion, huge grounds 
girdled by a rich black dirt bridle path, stables and pasture for 
a herd of horses. The hedges, flower beds, and grasses were as 
carefully manicured as a movie star’s nails. 

Wolta greeted Hagen on a glass-panel air-conditioned porch. 
The producer was informally dressed in blue silk shirt open at 
the neck, mustard-coloured slacks, soft leather sandals. 
Framed in all this colour and rich flibric his seamed, tough face 
Was startling. He handed Hagen an outsked martini glass and 
took one for himself from the prepared tray. He seemed more 
friendly than he had been earlier in the day. He put his arm 
over Hagen’s shoulder and said, * We have a little time before 
dinner, let’s go look at my horses.’ As they walked towards the 
stables he said, "1 checked you out, Tom; you should have 
told me your boss is Corleone. 1 thought you were just some 
third-rate hustler Johnny was running in to bluff me. And I 
don’t blufl. Not that I want to make enemies, 1 never believed 
in that. But let’s just enjoy ourselves now. We can talk 
business after dinner.’ 

Surprisingly Woitz proved to be a truly considerate host. 
He explained his new methods, innovations that he hoped 
would make his stable the most successful in America. The 
stables were all fire-proofed, sanitked to the highest degree, 
and guarded by a special security detail of private detectives. 
FinaUy Woitz led him to a stall which had a huge bronze 
plaque attached to its outside wall. On the plaque was the 
name ^Khartoum’. 

The horse inside the stall was, even to Hagen’s inex- 
perienced eyes, a beautiful animal. Khartoum’s skin was jet 
black except for a diamond-shaped white patch on his huge 
forehead. The great brown eyes glinted like golden apples, the 
black skin over the taut body was silk. Woitz said with childish 
pride, ‘The greatest racehorse in the world. I bought him in 
England last year for six hundred grand. I bet even the 
Russian Czars never paid that much for a single horse. But I’m 
not going to race hixn, I’m going to put him to stud. Fm going 
to build the greatest racing stable this country has ever 
known.’ He stroked die horse^s mane and called out sofdy, 


59 



'Khartoum, Khartoum.* There was real love in his voice and 
the animal responded. Woltz said to Hagen, 'Tm a good 
horseman, you know, and the first time 1 ever rode I was fifty 
years old.* He laughed. 'Maybe one of my grandmothers in 
Russia got raped by a G)ssack and I got his blood.* He tickled 
Khartoum’s belly and said with sincere admiration, ‘ Look at 
that cock on him. 1 should have such a cock.* 

They went back to the mansion to have dinner. It was served 
by three waiters under the command of a butler, the table 
linen and ware were all gold thread and silver, but Hagen 
found the food mediocre. Woltz obviously lived alone, and 
just as obviously was not a man who cared about food. Hagen 
waited until they had both lit up huge Havana cigars before he 
asked Woltz, ‘Does Johnny get it or not?’ 

‘I can’t,* Woltz said. ‘I can’t put Johnny into that picture 
even if I wanted to. The contracts arc all signed for all the 
performers and the cameras roll next week. There’s no way I 
can swing it.’ 

Hagen said impatiently, ‘Mr Woltz, the big advantage of 
dealing with a man at the top is that such an excuse is not valid. 
You can do anything you want to do.* He puffed on his cigar. 
‘ Don’t you believe my client * 2 ah keep his promises ? ’ 

Woltz said dryly, ‘I believe that I’m going to have labour 
trouble. Goff called me up on that, the son of a bitch, and the 
way he talked to me you’d never guess I pay him a hundred 
grand a year under the table. And I believe you can get that 
fag he-man star of mine off heroin. But I don’t care about that 
and 1 can finance my own pictures. Because 1 hate that bastard 
Fontane. Tell your boss tliis is one favour 1 can’t give but that 
he should try me again on anything else. Anything at all.’ 

Hagdn tliought, you sneaky bastard, then why the hell did 
you bring me all the way out here? The producer had some- 
thing on his mind. Hagen said coldly, ‘I don’t think you 
understand the situation. Mr Corleone is Johnny Fontanc’s 
godfather. That is a very close, a very sacred religious relation- 
ship.* Woltz bowed his head in respect at this reference to re- 
ligion. Hagen went on. ‘Italians have a little joke, that the 
world is so hard a man must have two fathers to look after 
him, and that’s why they have godfathers. Since Johnny’s 

6o 



father died, Mr Corleone feels his responsibility even more 
deeply. As for trying you again, Mr Corleone is much too 
sensitive. He never asks a second favour where he has been 
refused the first/ 

Woltz shrugged. ‘Tm sorry. The answer is still no. But since 
you'^rc here, what will it cost me to have that labour trouble 
cleared up? In czsh. Right now.' 

That solved one puzzle for Hagen. Why Woltz was putting 
in so much time on him when he had already decided not to 
give Johnny the part. And that could not be changed at this 
mteeting. Woltz felt secure; he was not afraid of the power of 
Don Corleone. And certainly Woltz with his national political 
connexions, his acquaintanceship with the FBI chief, his 
huge personal fortune, and his absolute power in the film 
industry, could not feel threatened by Don Corleone. To any 
intelligent man, even to Hagen, it seemed that Woltz had 
correctly assessed his position. He was impregnable to the Don 
if he was willing to take the losses the labour struggle would 
cost. There was only one thing wrong with the whole equa- 
tion. Don Corleone liad promised his godson he would get the 
part and Don Corleone had never, to Hagen's knowledge, 
broken his word in such matters. 

Hagen said quietly, * You arc deliberately misimdcrstanding 
me. You are trying to make me an accomplice to extortion. Mr 
Corleone promises only to .speak in your favour on this labour 
trouble as a Oiatter of friendsnip in return for your speaking in 
behalf of liis client. A friendly exchange of influence, nothing 
more. But 1 can see you don't take me seriously. Personally, 1 
think that is a mistake.' 

Woltz. as if he had been waiting for such a moment, let him- 
self get angry. ‘I understood perfectly,' he said, ‘that's the 
Mafia style, isn't it? All oiivc oil and sweet talk when what 
you're really doing is making threats. So let me lay it on the 
line. Johnny Fontana will never get that part and he’s perfect 
for it. It would make him a great star. But he never will be 
because I hate that pinko punk and I’m going to run him out of 
the movies. And I'll tell you why. He ruined one of my most 
valuable profegdes. For five years 1 had this girl under train- 
ing, singing, dancing, acting lessons, I spent hundreds of 

6i 



thousands of dollars. I was going to make her a star. I’ll be even 
more frank, just to show you that I’m not a hard-hearted man, 
that it wasn’t all dollars and cents. That girl was beautiful and 
she was the greatest piece of ass I’ve ever had and I’ve had them 
all over the world. She could suck you out like a water pump. 
Then Johnny comes along with that olive-oil voice and guinea 
charm and she runs off. She threw it all away just to make me 
ridiculous. A man in my position, Mr Hagen, can’t afford to 
look ridiculous. I have to pay Johnny off.’ 

For the first time, Woltz succeeded in astounding Hagen. 
He found it inconceivable that a grown man of substance 
would let such trivialities affect his judgement in an affair of 
business, and one of such importance. In Hagen’s world, the 
Corlcones’ world, the physical beauty, the sexual power of 
women, carried not the slightest weight in worldly matters. It 
was a private affair, except, of course, in matters of marriage 
and family disgrace. Hagen decided to make one last try. 

‘You are absolutely right, Mr Woltz,’ Hagen said. ‘But are 
your grievances that major? I don’t think you’ve understood 
how important this very small favour is to my client. Mr 
Corleone held the infant Johnny in his arms when he was 
baptized. When Johnny’s father died, Mr Q>rleone assumed 
the duties of parenthood, indeed he is called “Godfather” by 
many people who wish to show their respect and gratitude for 
the help he has given them, Mr Corleone never lets his friends 
down.’ 

Woltz stood ^p abruptly. ‘I’ve listened to about enough. 
Thugs don’t give me orders, I give them orders. If I pick up 
this phone, you’ll spend the night in jail. And if that Mafia 
goombah tries any rough stuff, he’ll find out I’m not a band 
leader. Yeah, I heard that story too. Listen, your Mr Corleone 
will never know what hit him. Even if I have to use my 
influence at the White House.’ 

The stupid, stupid son of a bitch. How the hell did he get to 
be a pev^nwantty Hagen wondered. Advisor to the President, 
head of the biggest movie studio in the world. Definitely the 
Don should get into the movie business. And the guy was 
taking his words at their sentimental face value. He was not 
getting the message. 


6i 



*Thank yoa for the dimier and a pleasant evening,’ Hagen 
said. 'Could you give me transportation to the airport? 1 don’t 
think I’ll spend the night.’ He smiled coldly at Wolt 2 . 'Mr 
Corleone is a man who insists on hearing bad news at once/ 

While waiting in the floodlit colonnade of the mansion for 
his car, Hagen saw two women about to enter a long limousine 
already parked in the driveway. They were the beautiful 
twelve-year-old blonde girl and her mother ^e had seen in 
Woltz’s oflice that morning. But now the girl’s exquisitely cut 
mouth seemed to have smeared into a thick, pink mass. Her 
sea-blue eyes were Aimed over and when she walked down the 
steps towards the open car her long legs tottered like a crippled 
foal’s. Her mother supported the child, helping her into the 
car, hissing commands into her ear. The mother’s head turned 
for a quick furtive look at Hagen and he saw in her eyes a 
burning, hawklike triumph. Then she too disappeared into the 
limousine. 

So that was why he hadn’t got the plane ride from Los 
Angeles, Hagen thought. The girl and her mother had made 
the trip with the movie producer. That had given Woltz 
enough time to relax before dinner and do the job on the little 
kid. And Johnny wanted to live in this world? Good luck to 
him, and good luck to Woltz. 

Paulie Gatto hated quickie jobs, especially when they in- 
volved violence. He liked to plan things ahead. And some- 
thing like tonight, even though it was punk stuff, could turn 
into serious business if somebody made a mistake. Now, 
sipping his beer, he glanced around, checking how the two 
young punks were making out with the two little tramps at the 
bar. 

Paulie Gatto knew everything there was to know about 
those two punks. Their names were Jerry Wagner and Kevin 
Moonan. They were both about twenty years old, good-look- 
ing, brown-haired, tall, well-built. Both were due to go back 
to college out of town in two weeks, both had fathers with 
political influence and this, with their college student classifi- 
cation, had so far kept them out of the draft. Hiey were both 
also under suspended sentences for assaulting the daughter of 

65 



Amerigo Bonasera. The lou87 bastards, Paulic Gatto thought. 
Draft dodging, violating their probation by drinking in a 
bar after midnight, chasing floozies. Young punks. Paulie 
Gatto had been deferred from the draft himself because 
his doctor had furnished the draft board with documents 
showing that this patient, male, white, aged twenty-six, un- 
married, had received electrical shock treatments for a mental 
condition. All false of course, but Paulie Gatto felt that he 
bad earned his draft exemption. It had been arranged by 
Ciemenza after Gatto had ‘made his bones’ in the family 
business. 

It was Ciemenza who had told him that this job must be. 
rashed through, before the boys went to college. Why the hell 
did it have to be done in New York, Gatto wondered. Clc- 
menza was always giving extra orders instead of just giving 
out the job. Now if those two little tramps walked out with 
the punks it would be another night wasted. 

He could hear one of the girls laughing and saying, ‘Are you 
crazy, Jerry? Tm not going in any car with you. i don't want 
to wind up in the hospital like that other poor girl.’ Her voice 
was spitefully rich with satisfaction. That was enough for 
Gatto, He finished up his beer and walked out into the dark 
street. Perfect. It was after midnight. There was only one other 
bar that showed light. The rest of the stores were closed. The 
precinct patrol car had been taken care of by Ciemenza. They 
wouldn’t be aiound that way until they got a radio call and 
then they’d come slow. 

He leaned against the four-door Chevy sedan. In the back 
scat two men were sitting, almost invisible, although they 
were very big men. Paulie said, ‘Take them when they come 
out.’ 

He still thought it had all been set up too fast. Ciemenza had 
given him copies ot the police mug shots of the two punks, the 
dope on where the punks went drinking every ni ght to pick up 
bar girls. Paulie had recruited two of the strong-arms in the 
family and fingered the punks for them. He had also given 
them their instructions. No blows on the top or the back of the 
head, there was to be no accidental fetality. Other «-han that 
they could go as far as they liked. He bad given them only one 

64 



warning; *If those punks get out of the hospital in less than a 
month, you guys go back to driving trucks/ 

The two big men were getting out of the car. They were 
both ex-boxers who Had never made it past the small clubs and 
had been fixed up by Sonny Corleone with a little loan-shark 
action so that they could make a decent living. They were, 
naturally, anxious to show their gratitude. 

When Jerry Wagner and Kevin Moonan came out of the bar 
they were perfect setups. The bar girl’s taunts had left their 
adolescent vanity prickly. Paulie Gatto, leaning against the 
fender of his car, called out to them with a teasing laugh, 
‘Hey, Casanova, those broads really brushed you off.’ 

The two young men turned on him with delight. Paulie 
Gatto looked like a perfect outlet for their humiliation. Ferret- 
faced, short, slightly built, and a wise guy in the bargain. They 
pounced on him eagerly and immediately found their arms 
pinned by two men grabbing them from behind. At the same 
moment Paulie Gatto had slipped onto his right hand, a 
specially made set of brass knuckles studded with one- 
sixteenth-inch iron spikes. His timing was good, he worked 
out in the gym three times a week. He smashed the punk 
named Wagner right on the nose. The man holding Wagner 
lifted him up off the ground and Paulie swung his arm, 
uppercutting ii^to the perfectly positioned groin. Wagner 
went Ump and the big man dropped him« This had taken no 
more than six seconds. 

Now both of them turned their attention to Kevin Moonan, 
who was trying to shout. The man holding him from behind 
did so easily with one huge muscled arm. The other hand he 
put around Moonan ’s throat to cut off any sound. , 

Paulie Gatto jumped into the car and started the motor. The 
two big men were beating Moonan to jelly. They did so with 
(ngbtening deliberation, as if they bad all the time in the 
world. They did not throw punches in flurries but in timed, 
slow-motion sequences that carried the full weight of their 
massive bodies. Each blow landed with a jp/a/ of flesh 
splitting open. Gatto got a glimpse of Moonan^s face. It was 
The two mea ieft Mooaaa lying on the a'dc- 

»n tufned tbeir atteatim to Wagaer. Wagaer waa tryiag 



to get to his feet and he started to scream for help. Someone 
came out of the bar and the two men had to work faster now. 
They clubbed Wagner to his knees. One of the men took his 
arm and twisted it, then kicked him in the spine. There was a 
cracking sound and Wagner’s scream of agony brought 
windows open all along the street. The two men worked very 
quickly. One of them held Wagner up by using his two hands 
around Wagner’s head like a vice. The other man smashed his 
huge fist into the fixed target. There were more people coming 
out of the bar but none tried to interfere. Paulie Gatto yelled, 
‘ Come on, enough.* 'Hie two big men jumped into the car and 
Paulie gunned it away. Somebody would describe the car and 
read the licence plates but it didn’t matter. It was a stolen 
California plate and there were one hundred thousand black 
Chevy sedans in New York City. 


CHAPTER^TWO 


Tom Hagen went to his law office in the city on Thursday 
morning. He planned to catch up on his paper work so as to 
have ever3rthing cleared away for the meeting with Virgd 
Sollozao on Friday. A meeting of such importance that he had 
asked the Don for a full evening of talk to prepare for the 
proposition they knew SoUozzo would offer the family 
business. Hagen wanted to have all little details cleared away 
so that he could go to that preparatory meeting with an 
unencumbered mind. 

The Don had not seemed surprised when Hagen returned 
from California late Tuesday evening and told him the results 
of the negotiations with Woltz. He had made Hagen go over 
every detail and grimaced with distaste when Hagen told about 
the beautiful little girl and her mother. He had murmured 
^ inf amiia \ his strongest disapproval. He had asked Hagen one 
final question. ^Does this man have real balls?’ 

Hagen considered exactly what the Don meant by this 
question. Over the years he had learned that the Don’s values 

66 



were so different from those of most people that his words also 
could have a different meaning. Did Woltz have character? 
Did he have a strong will ? He most certainly did, but that was 
not what the Don was asking. Did the movie producer have 
the courage not to be bluffed? Did he have the willingness to 
suffer heavy financial loss delay on his movies would mean, 
the scandal of his big star exposed as a user of heroin? Again 
the answer was yes. But again this was not what the Don 
meant. Finally Hagen translated the question properly in his 
mind. Did Jack Woltz have the balls to risk everything, to run 
the chance of losing all on a matter of principle, on a matter of 
honour; for revenge? 

Hagen smiled. He did it rarely but now he could not resist 
jesting with the Don. ‘ You*re asking if he is a Sicilian.* Tlic 
Don nodded his head pleasantly, acknowledging the flattering 
witticism and its truth. *No,* Hagen said. 

That had been all. The Don had pondered the question until 
the next day. On Wednesday afternoon he had called Hagen to 
his home and given him his instructions. The instructions liad 
consumed the rest of Hagen’s working day and left him dazed 
with admiration. There was no question in his mind that the 
Don had solved the problem, that Woltz would call him this 
morning with the news that Johnny Fontane had the starring 
part in his new war movie. 

At that moment the phone did ring but it was Amerigo 
Bonasera. The undertaker’s voice was trembling with grati- 
tude. He wanted Hagen to convey to the Don his undying 
friendship. The Don had only to call on him. He, Amerigo 
Bonasera, would lay down his life for the blessed Godfather. 
Hagen assured him that the Don would be told. 

The Daily News had carried a middle-page spread of Jerry 
Wagner and Kevin Moonan lying in the street. The photos 
were expertly gruesome, they seemed to be pulps of human 
beings. Miraculously, said the News^ they were both still alive 
though they would both be in the hospital for months and 
would require plastic surgery. Hagen made a note to tell 
Qemenza that something should be done for Paulie Gatto. He 
seemed to know his job. 

Hagen worked quickly and efficiently for the next three 

67 



hours qonsolidating eaming reports £com die Don’s teal estate 
company, his olive oil importing business, and his coostrucdon 
firm. None of them were doing well but with the war over 
they should all become rich producers. He had almost for- 
gotten the Johnny Fontane problem when his secretary told 
him Gilifornia was calling. He felt a little thrill of antidpadoo 
as he picked up the phone and said, * Hagen here. ’ 

The voice that came over the phone was unrecogniaable 
with hate and passion. * You fucking bastard,’ Woltz screamed. 
*ril have you all in jail for a hunted years. I’ll spend every 
penny 1 have to get you. I’ll get that Johnny Fontane’s balls 
cut oflf, do you hear me, you guinea fiick?’ 

Hagen said kindly, ‘I’m German-Irish.* There was a long 
pause and then a click of the phone being hung up. Hagen 
smiled. Not once had Woltz uttered a threat against Don 
Corleone himself. Genius had its rewards. 

Jack Woltz always slept alone. He had a bed big enough for 
ten people and a bedroom large enough for a movie ballroom 
scene, but he had slept alone since the death of his first wife 
ten years before. This did not mean he no longer used women. 
He was physically a vigorous man despite his age, but he could 
be aroused now only by very young girls and had learned that 
a few hours in the evening were all the youth of his body and 
his patience could tolerate. 

On this Thursday morning, for some reason, he awoke 
early. The light of ^wn made his huge bedroom as misty as 
a foggy meadow-land. Far down at the foot of his bed was 
a familiar shape and Woltz struggled up on his elbows to 
get a clearer look. It had the sl^pe of a horse’s head. Still 
groggy, Woltz reached and flicked on the night table lamp. 

The shock of what he saw made him physically ill. It 
seemed as if a great sledgehammer had struck him on the chest, 
his heartbeat jumped erratically and he became nauseous. His 
vomit spluttered on the thick flair rug. 

Severed from its body, the black silky head of the great 
horse Khartoum was stuck fast in a thick cake of blood. White 
reedy tendons showed. Froth covered the muzzle and those 
apple-sized eyes that had glinted Uke gold were mottled the 

68 



colour of rotdng fruit with dead, haemorrhaged blood. 
Woltz was struck by a purely animal terror and out of that 
terror he screamed for his servants and out of that terror he 
called Hagen to make his uncontrolled threats. His maniacal 
raving alarmed the butler, who called Woltz’s personal 
physician and his second in command at the studio. But Woltz 
regained his senses before they arrived. 

He had been profoundly shocked. What kind of man could 
destroy an animal worth six hundred thousand dollars? 
Without a word of warning. Without any negotiation to have 
the act, its order, countermanded. The ruthlessness, the sheer 
disregard for any \alue8, implied a man who considered him- 
self completely his owrt law, even his own God. And a man 
who backed up this kind of will with the power and cunning 
that held his own stable security force of no account. For by 
this time Woltz had learned that the horse’s body had ob- 
viously been heavily drugged before someone leisurely hacked 
the huge triangular head ofiF with an axe. The men on night 
duty claimed that they had heard nothing. To Woltz this 
seemed impossible. They could be made to talk. They had 
been bought off and they could be made to tell who had done 
the buying. 

Woltz was not a stupid man, he was merely a supremely 
egotistical one. He had mistaken the power he wielded in his 
world to be more potent than the power of Don Corleone. He 
had merely need^ some proof that this was not true. He 
understood this message. That despite all his wealth, despite 
all his contacts with the President of the United States, despite 
all his claims of friendship with the director of the FBI, an 
obscure importer of Italian olive oil would have him killed. 
Would actually have him killed! Because he wouldn’t give 
Johnny Fontane a movie part he wanted. It was incredible. 
People didn’t have any right to act that way. There couldn’t be 
any kind of world if people acted that way. It was insane. It 
meant you couldn’t do what you wanted with your own 
money, with the companies you owned, the power you had to 
give orders. It was ten times worse than communism. It had to 
be smashed. It must never be allowed. 

Woltz let the doctor give him a very mild sedation. It helped 

69 



him calm down again and to think sensibly. What really 
shocked him was the casualness with which this man Corleonc 
had ordered the destruction of a world-famous horse worth 
six hundred thousand dollars. Six hundred thousand dollars I 
And that was just for openers- Woltz shuddered. He thought 
of this life he had built up. He was rich. He could have the 
most beautiful women in the world by crooldng his finger and 
promising a contract. He w^as received by kings and queens. 
He lived a life as perfect as money and power could make it. 
It was crazy to risk all this because of a wliim. Maybe he could 
get to Corleone. What was the legal penalty for killing a race- 
horse? He laughed wildly and his doctor and servants watched 
him with nervous anxiety. Another thought occurred to him. 
He would be the laughingstock of California merely because 
someone had contemptuously defied his power in such 
arrogant fashion. That decided him. That and the thought 
that maybe, maybe they wouldn’ kill him. That they had 
something much more clever and painful in reserve. 

Woltz gave the necessary orders. His personal confidential 
staff swung into action. The servants and the doctor were 
sworn to secrecy on pain of incurring the studio and Woltz’s 
undying enmity. Word was given to the press that the race- 
horse Khartoum had died of an illness contracted during his 
shipment from England. Orders were given to bury the 
remains in a secret place on the estate. 

Six hours later Johnny Fontane received a phone call from 
the executive producer of the film telling him to report for 
work the following Monday. 

That evening, Hagen went to the Don’s house to prepare 
him for the important meeting the next day with Virgil 
Sollozzo. The Don had summoned his eldest son to attend, 
and Sonny Corleonc, his heavy Cupid-shaped face drawn with 
fatigue, w’as sipping at a glass of water. He must still be hump- 
ing that maid of honour, Hagen thought. Another worry. 

Don Corleone settled into an armchair puffing his Di Nobili 
cigar. Hagen kept a box of them in his room. He had tried to 
get the Don to switch to Havanas but the Don claimed they 
hurt his throat. 


70 



*Do we know everything necessary for us to know?* the 
Don asked. 

Hagen opened the folder that held his notes. The notes were 
in no way incriminating, merely cryptic reminders to make 
sure he touched on every important detail. ‘S0II0220 is coming 
to us for help/ Hagen said. ‘He will ask the family to put up at 
least a million dollars and to promise some sort of immunity 
from the law. For that we get a piece of the action, nobody 
knows how much. S0II0Z20 is vouched for by the Tattaglia 
family and they may have a piece of the action. The action is 
narcotics. Sollozzo has the contacts in Turkey, where they 
grow the poppy. From there he ships to Sicily. No trouble. In 
Sicily he has the plant to process into heroin. He has safety- 
valve operations to bring it down to morphine and bring it up 
to heroin if necessary. But it would seem that the processing 
plant in Sicily is pfotected in every way. The only hitch is 
bringing it into this country, and then distribution. Also initial 
capital. A million dollars cash doesn't grow on trees.* Hagen 
saw Don Corleone grimace. The old man hated unnecessary 
flourishes in business matters. He went on hastily. 

‘They call Sollozzo the Turk. Two reasons. He*s spent a lot 
of time in Turkey and is supposed to have a Turkish wife and 
kids. Second. He’s supposed to be very quick with the knife, or 
was, when he was young. Only in matters of business, though, 
and with some sort of reasonable complaint. A very compe- 
tent man and his own boss. He has a record, he’s done two 
terms in prison, one in Italy, one in the United States, and he’s 
known to the authorities as a narcotics man. This could be a 
plus for us. It means that he’ll never get immunity to testify, 
since he’s considered the top and, of course, because of his 
record. Also he has an American wife and three c*hildrcn and 
be is a good family man. He’ll stand still for any rap as long as 
he knows that they will be well taken care of for living 
money.’ 

The Don puffed on his cigar and said, ‘Santino, what do 
you think?* 

Hagen knew what Sonny would say. Sonny was chafing at 
being under the Don’s thumb. He wanted a big operation of 
his own. Something like this would be perfect. 


71 



Sonny took a long slug of Scotch. *Thctc*8 a lot of money 
in that white powder/ he said. *But it could be dangerous. 
Some people could wind up in jail for twenty years. I’d say that 
if we kept out of the operations end, just stuck to protection 
and financing, it might be a good idea.’ 

Hagen looked at Sonny approvingly. He had played his 
cards well. He had stuck to the obvious, much the best course 
for him. 

The Don puffed on his cigar. ‘And you, Tom, what do you 
think?’ 

Hagen composed himself to be absolutely honest. He had 
already come to the conclusion that the Don would refuse 
Sollozzo’s proposition. But what was worse, Hagen was con- 
vinced that for one of the few times in his experience, the Don 
had not thought things through. He was not looking far 
enough ahead. 

‘Go ahead, Tom,’ the Don said encouragingly. ‘Not even a 
Sicilian Consigliori always agrees with the boss.* I'hey all 
laughed. 

‘I think you should say yes,’ Hagen said. ‘You know^ all the 
obvious reasons. But the most important one is this. There is 
more money potential in narcotics than in any other business. 
If we don’t get into it, somebody else will, maybe the Tattaglia 
family. With the revenue they earn they can amass more and 
more police and political power. Their family will become 
stronger than ours. Eventually they will come after us to take 
away what wc have. It’s just like countries. If they arm, we 
have to arm. If they become stronger economically, they 
become a threat to us. Now we have the gambling and we have 
the unions and right now they are the best things to have. But 
I think narcotics is the coming thing. I think we have to have a 
piece of that action or we risk everything we have. Not now, 
but maybe ten years from now.’ 

The Don seemed enormously impressed. He puffed on his 
cigar and murmured, ‘ITiat’s the most important thing of 
course.’ He sighed and got to his feet. ‘What time do I have to 
meet this infidel tomorrow?’ 

Hagen said hopefully, ‘He’ll be here at ten in the morning.’ 
Maybe the Don would go for it. 



*1’11 want you both here with me/ the Don said. He rose, 
stretching, and took his son by the arm. ^Santino, get some 
sleep tonight, you look like t^ devil himself. Take care of 
yourself, you won*t be young forever.* 

Sonny, encouraged by this sign of fatherly concern, asked 
the question Hagen did not dare to ask. ‘Pop, what*8 your 
answer going to be?* 

Don Corleone smiled. ‘How do I know until I hear the 
percentages and other details? Besides I have to have time to 
think over the advice given here tonight. After all, l*m not a 
man who does things rashly.* As he went out the doot he said 
casually to Hagen, ‘Do you have in your notes that the Turk 
made his living from prostitution before the war? As the 
Tattaglia family does now. Write that down before you for- 
get.* There was just a touch of derision in the Don’s voice and 
Hagen flushed. He had deliberately not mentioned it, legiti- 
mately so since it really had no be^ing, but he had feared it 
might prejudice the Don’s decision. He was notoriously 
straitlaced in matters of sex. 

Virgil ‘the Turk* Sollozzo was a powerfully built, medium- 
sized man of dark complexion who could have been taken for 
a true Turk. He had a scimitar of a nose and cruel black eyes. 
He also had an impressive dignity. 

Sonny Corleone met him at the door and brought him into 
the oflice where Hagen and the Don waited. Hagen thought he 
had never seen a more dangerous-looking man except for 
Luca Brasi. 

There were polite handshakings all around. If the Don ever 
asks me if this mao has balls, 1 would have to answer yes, 
Hagen thought. He had never seen such force in ohe man, not 
even the Don. In fset the Don appeared at his worst. He was 
being a little too simple, a little too peasantlike in his greeting. 

Sollozzo came to the point immediately. The business was 
narcotics. Everything was set up. Certain poppy fields in 
Turkey had pledged him certain amounts every year. He had a 
prof&ected plant in France to convert into morphine. He had an 
absolutely secure plant in Sicily to process into heroin. 
Smuggling into hcih countries was as positively safe as such 


75 



matters could be. Entry into the United States would entail 
about five per cent losses since the FBI itself was incorruptible, 
as they both knew. But the profits would be enormous, the 
risk nonexistent. 

*Then why do you come to me?’ the Don asked politely. 
*How have I deserved your generosity?’ 

Sollozzo’s dark face remained impassive. ‘I need two 
million dollars cash,’ he said. ‘Equally important, I need a man 
who has powerful friends in the important places. Some of my 
couriers will be caught over the years. That is jncviiable. They 
will all have clean records, that I promise. So it will be logical 
for judges to give light sentences. 1 need a friend w^ho can 
guarantee that when my people get in trouble they won’t 
spend more than, a year or two in jail. Then thev won’t talk. 
But if they get ten and twenty \ cars, ^ho know In this wc rid 
there are many weak individuals. They may talk, they may 
jeopardize more important people. I ega) protection is a must. 
I hear, Don Corleonc, tho. voa have as many judges in your 
pocket as a bootblack has {ULces of silver.’ 

Don Corlcone didn’t bother U > acknowledge the compliment. 
‘What percentage for my family?’ he asked. 

SoDoz/o’s eyes gleamed. ‘Fifty per cent.’ He paused and 
then said in a voice t!ut was almost a caress, ‘In the first year 
your share would be three or four million dollars. Then it 
would go up.’ 

Don ("orleone said, ‘And what is the percentage of the 
Tatiagha family?’ 

For the first linic Sollozzo seemed to be nervous. ‘They will 
receive soriicthing from my share. I need some help in the 
operations.' 

‘ So,’ Don Corleonc said, ‘I receive fifty per cent merely for 
finance and legal protection. I have no worries about opera- 
tions, is that what you tell me?’ 

Sollozzo nodded. ‘If you think two million dollars in cash is 
“merely finance”, I congratulate you, Don Corleone.’ 

The Don said quietly, ‘I consented to see you out of my 
respect for the Tattaglias and because I’ve heard you arc a 
serious man to be treated also with respect. I must say no to 
you but I must give you my reasons. The profits in your 


74 



business are huge but so are the risks. Your operation, if 1 were 
part of it, could damage my other interests. It’s true I have 
many, many friends in politics, but they would not be so ’ 
friendly if my business were narcotics instead of gambling. 
They think gambling is something like liquor, a harmless 
vice, and they think narcotics a dirty business. No, don’t 
protest. I’m telling you their thoughts, not mine. How a man 
makes his living is not my concern. And what I am telling you 
is that this business of yours is too risky. All the members of 
my family have lived well the last ten years, without danger, 
without harm, I can’t endanger them or their livelihoods out 
of greed.’ 

The only sign of Soilozzo’s disappointment was a quick 
flickering of his eyes around the room, as if he hoped Hagen 
or Sonny would speak in his support. Then he said, ‘Are you 
worried about security for your two million?’ 

The Don smiled coldly. ‘No,* he said. 

S0II0220 tried again. ‘The Tattaglia family will guarantee 
your investment also.’ 

It was then tluit Sonny Corleone made an unforgivable error 
in judgement and procedure. He said eagerly, ‘The Tattaglia 
family guarantees the return of our investment without any 
percentage from us?’ 

Hagen was horrified at this break. He saw the Don turn 
cold, malevolent eyes on his eldest son, who froze in uncom- 
prehending dismay. Sollozzo’s eyes flickered again but this 
time with satisfaction. He had discovered a chink in the Don’s 
fortress. When the Don spoke his voice held a dismissal. 
‘Young people arc greedy,* he said. ‘And today they have no 
manners. They interrupt their ciders. They meddle. But I have 
a sentimental weakness for my children and I have spoiled 
them. As you see. Signor S0II0220, my no is final. Let me say 
that I myself wish you good fortune in your business. It has no 
conflict with my own. I’m sorry that I had to disappoint you.’ 

Sollozzo bowed, shook the Don’s hand and let Hagen take 
him to his car outside. There was no expression on his face 
when he said goodbye to Hagen. 

Back in the room, Don Corleone asked Hagen, ‘What did 
you think of that man?’ 


75 



^He’s a Sicilian,’ Hagen said dryly. 

The Don nodded his head thoughtfully. Then he turned to 
his son and said gently, * Sahtino, never let anyone outside the 
family know what you are thinking. Never let them know 
what you have under your Bngernails. I think your brain is 
going soft from all that comedy you play with that young girl. 
Stop it and pay attention to business. Now get out of my 
sight.* 

Hagen saw the surprise on Sonny’s face, then anger at his 
Cither’s reproach. Did he really think the Don would be 
ignorant of his conquest, Hagen wondered. And did he really 
not know what a dangerous mistake he had made this morn- 
ing? If that were true, Hagen would never wish to be the 
Consigliori to the Don of Santino Corleone. 

Don Corleone waited until Sonny had left the room. Then 
he sank back into his leather armchair and motioned brus- 
quely for a drink. Hagen poured him a glass of anisette. The 
Don looked up at him. ‘ Send Luca Brasi to see me,’ he said. 

Three months later, Hagen hurried through the paper work 
in his city office hoping to leave early enough for some Christ- 
mas shopping for his wife and children. He was interrupted by 
a phone call from a Johnny Fontane bubbling wi^ high 
spirits. The picture had been shot, the rushes, whatever the 
hell they were, Hagen thought, were fabulous. He was sending 
the Don a present for Christmas that would knock his eyes 
out, he’d bring it himself but there were some little things to 
be done in the movie. He would have to stay out on the Coast. 
Hagen tried to conceal his impatience. Johnny Fontane’s 
charm had always been lost on him. But his interest was 
aroused. ‘What is it?’ he asked. Johnny Fontane chuckled and 
said, ‘I can’t tell, that’s the best part of a Christmas present.’ 
Hagen immediately lost all interest and finally managed, 
politely, to hang up. 

Ten minutes later his secretary told hi^n that Connie 
Corleone Was on the phone and wanted to'^ speak to him. 
Hagen sighed. As a young girl Connie had b^n nice, as a 
married woman she was a nuisance. She made complaints 
about her husband. She kept going home to visit her mother 

76 



for two or three days. AodGurloRliadwas tatningoattobea 
real loser. He had ^en fixed up with a nice little business and 
was running it into the ground. He was also drinking, whoring 
around, gambling, and beating his wife up occasionally. 
Connie hadn’t told her family about that but she had told 
Hagen. He wondered what new tale of woe she had for him 
now. 

But the Christmas spirit seemed to have cheered her up. She 
just wanted to ask Hagen what her father would really like for 
Christmas. And Sonny and Fred and Mike. She already knew 
what she would get her mother. Hagen made some sugges- 
tions, all of which she rejected as silly. Finally she let him go. 

When the phone rang again, Hagen threw his papers back 
into the basket. The hell with it. He’d leave. It never occurred 
to him to refuse to take the call, however. When his secretary 
told nim it was Michael Corleone he picked up the phone with 
pleasure. He had always liked Mike. 

*Tom,* Michael Corleone said, ‘I’m driving down to the 
city with Kay tomorrow. There’s something important I want 
to tell the old man before Christmas. Will he be home to- 
morrow night?’ 

^Surc,’ Hagen said. 'He’s not going out of town until after 
Christmas. Anything 1 can do for you?’ 

Michael was as closemouthed as his father. 'No,’ he said. *1 
guess rU see you Christmas, everybody is going to be out at 
Long Beach, right?’ 

'Right,’ Hagen said. He was amused when Mike hung up on 
him without any small talk. 

He told his secretary to call his wife and tell her he would be 
home a little late but to have some supper for him.* Outside the 
building he walked briskly downtown towards Macy’s. Some- 
one stepped in his way. To his surprise he saw it was SoUozao. 

SoUozzo took him by the arm and said quietly, ‘Don’t be 
frightened, I just want to talk to you.’ A car parked at the 
kerb suddenly had its door open. Sollozzo said urgently, ‘Get 
m, I want to talk to you.’ 

Hagen pulled his arm loose. He was sdil not alarmed, just 
irritated. ‘1 haven’t got time,’ he said. At that moment two 
men came up behind him. Hagen felt a sudden weakness in his 


77 



kgs. S0II0220 said softly, ‘Get in the car. If I wanted to kill 
you you’d be dead now. Trust me.’ 

Without a shred of trust Hagen got into the car. 

Michael Corleone had lied to Hagen. He was already in New 
York, and he had called from a room in the Hotel Pennsylvania 
less than ten blocks away. Wl^.cn he hung up the phone, Kay 
Adams put out her cigarette and said, ‘Mike, what a good 
fibber you are.* 

Michael sat down beside her on the bed. ‘All for you, 
honey ; if I told my family wc were in town we*d have to go 
there right away. Then we couldn’t go out to dinner, we 
couldn’t go to the theatre, and we couldn’t sleep together 
tonight. Not in my father’s house, not when we’re not 
married.* He put his arms around her and kissed her gently on 
the lips. Her mouth was sweet and he gently pulled her down 
on the bed. She closed her eyes, waiting for him to make love 
to her and Michael felt an enormous happiness. He had spent 
the war years fighting in the Pacific, and on those bloody 
islands he had dreamed of a girl like Kay Adams. Of a beauty 
like hers, A fair and fragile body, milky-skinned and electri- 
fied by passion. She opened her eyes and then pulled his head 
down to kiss him. They made love until it was time for dinner 
and the theatre. 

After dinner they walked past the brightly-lit department 
stores full of holiday shoppers and Michael said to her, ‘What 
shall 1 get you for Christmas?’ 

She pressed against him. ‘Just you,’ she said. ‘Do you think 
your father will approve of me?’ 

Michael said gently, ‘That’s not really the question. Will 
your parents approve of me?’ 

Kay shrugged. ‘I don’t care,’ she said. 

Michael said, ‘1 even thought of changing my name, 
legally, but if something happened, that wouldn’t really help. 
You sure you want to be a Corleone?’ He said it only half- 
jokingly. 

‘Yes,’ she said without smiling. They pressed against each 
other. They had decided to get married during Christmas 
week, a quiet civil ceremony at City Hall with just two friends 

78 



as witnesses. But Michael had insisted he must tell his father. 
He had explained that his father would not object in any way 
as long as it was not done in secrecy. Kay was doubtful. She 
said she could not tell her parents until after the marriage. *Of 
course they’ll think I’m pregnant,’ she said. Michael grinned. 

* So will my parents,’ he said. 

What neither of them mentioned was the fact that Michael 
would have to cut his close ties with his family. They both 
understood that Michael had already done so to some extent 
and yet they both felt guilty about this fact. Tliey planned to 
finish college, seeing each other weekends and living together 
during summer vacations. It seemed like a happy life. 

The play was a musical called Carousel and its sentimental 
story of a braggart thief made them smile at each other with 
amusement. When they came out of the theatre it had turned 
cold. Kay snuggled up to him and said, ‘After we’re married, 
will you beat me and then steal a star for a present?’ 

Michael laughed. ‘I’m going to be a mathematics professor,’ 
he said. Then he asked, ‘Do you want something to eat before 
we go to the hotel?’ 

liy shook her head. She looked up at him meaningfully. As 
always he was touched by her eagerness to make love. He 
smiled down at her, and they kissed in the cold street. Michael 
felt hungry, and he decided to order sandwiches sent up to the 
room. 

In the hotel lobby Michael pushed Kay towards the news- 
stand and said, ‘Get the papers while I get the key.’ He had to 
wait in a small line; the hotel was still short of help despite the 
end of the war. Michael got his room key and looked around 
impatiently for Kay. She was standing by the 'news-stand, 
staring down at a newspaper she held in her hand. He walked 
towards her. She looked up at him. Her eyes were filled with 
tears. ‘Oh, Mike,’ she said, ‘oh, Mike.’ He took the paper 
from her hands. The first thing he saw was a photo of his 
father lying in the street, his head in a pool of blood. A man 
was sitting on the kerb weeping like a child. It was his 
brother Freddie. Michael Corleone felt his body turning to 
ice. There was no grief, no fear, just cold rage. He said to Kay, 
‘Go up to the room.’ But he had to take her by the arm and 


79 



lead her into the elevator. They rode up together in silence. In 
their room^ Michael sat down on the bed and opened the 
paper. The headlines said, vito corleoke shot, alleged 

RACKET CHIEF CRITICALLY WOUNDED. OPERATED ON 
UNDER HEAVY POLICE GUARD. BLOODY MOB WAR 
FEARED. 

Michael felt the weakness in his legs. He said to Kay, ‘He’s 
not dead, the bastards didn’t kill him.’ He read the story again. 
His father had been shot at five in the afternoon. That meant 
that while he had been making love to Kay, having dinner, 
enjoying the theatre, his father was near death. Michael felt 
sick with guilt. 

Kay said, ‘Shall v/e go down to the hospital now?’ 

Michael shook his head. ‘Let me call the house first. The 
people who cid this are cra 2 y and now that the old man’s still 
alive they’ll be desperate. Who the hell knows what thcy’U 
pull next.’ 

Both phones in the Long Beach house were busy and it was 
almost twenty minutes before Michael could get through. He 
heard Sonny’s voice saying, ‘Yeah.’ 

‘ Sonny, it’s me,’ Michael said. 

He could hear the relief in Sonny’s voice. ‘Jesus, kid, you 
had us worried. VCT?ere the hell are you? T’vc sent people to 
that hick town of yours to see what happened .’ 

‘How’s the old man?’ Michael said. ‘How bad is he hurt?’ 

‘Pretty bad,’ Sonny said. ‘They shot him five times. But he’s 
tough.’ Sonny’s voice was proud. ‘The doctors said he’ll pull 
through. Listen, kid, I’m busy, I can’t talk, where are you?’ 

‘In New York,’ Michael said. ‘Didn’t Tom tell you I was 
coming down?’ 

Sonny’s voice dropped a little. ‘They’ve snatched Tom. 
That’s why I was worried about you. His wife is here. She 
don’t know and neither do the cops. I don’t want them to 
know. The bastards who pulled this must he crazy. I want you 
to get out here right away and keep your mouth shut. OK?’ 

‘OK,’ Mike said, ‘do you know who did it?’ 

‘Sure,’ Sonny said. ‘And as soon as Luca Brasi checks in 
they’re gonna he dead meat. We still have all the horses.* 

‘I’ll be out in an hour/ Mike said. ‘In a cab/ He hung up. 

8o 



The papers had been oa the streets {be over three hoars. There 
must have been radio news reports. It was almost impossible 
that Luca hadn’t heard the news. Thoughtfully Michael 
pondered the question. Where was Luca Brasi? It was the 
same question ^t Hagen was asking himself at that moment. 
It was the same question that was worrying Sonny Codeone 
out in Long Beach. 

At a quarter to five that afternoon, Don Corleone had 
finished checking the papers the office manager of his olive oil 
company had prepared for him. He put on his jacket and 
rapp^ his knuckles on his son Freddie’s head to make him 
take his nose out of the afternoon newspaper. *Tell Gatto to 
get the car from the lot/ he said. *ril be ready to go home in a 
few minutes.’ 

Freddie grunted. ’I’ll have to get it myself. Paulie called in 
sick this morning. Got a cold again.’ 

Don Corleone looked thoughtful for a moment. ’That’s Ae 
third time this month. I think maybe you’d better get a 
healthier fellow for this job. Tell Tom.’ 

Fred protested. ’PauUe’s a good kid. If he says he’s sick, he’s 
sick. I don’t mind getting the car.’ He left the office. Don 
Corleone watched out the window as his son crossed Ninth 
Avenue to the parking lot. He stopped to call Hagen’s office 
but there was no answer. He called the house at Long Beach 
but again there was no answer. Irritsted, he looked out the 
window. His car was parked at the kerb in front of bis build- 
ing. Freddie was leaning against the fender, arms folded, 
watching the throng of Christmas shoppers. Don Corleone 
put on his jacket. The office manager helped him with his 
overcoat. Don Corleone grunted his thanks and went out the 
door and started down the two flights of steps. 

Out in the street the early winter light was Bdling. Freddie 
leaned casuaUy against the fmder of the heavy Buick. When he 
saw his father come out of the building Freddie went out Into 
the street to the driver’s side of the car and got in. Don 
Corleone was about to get in on the sidewalk side of the car 
when he hesitated and then turned back to the long open fhiit 
stand near the comer, lliis had been Us habit latcfy, he loved 

it 



the big out-of-season fruits, yellow peaches and oranges, that 
glowed in their green boxes. The proprietor sprang to serve 
him. Don Corleone did not handle the fruit. He pointed. The 
fruit man disputed his decisions only once, to show him that 
one of his choices had a rotten underside. Don Corleone took 
the paper bag in his left hand and paid the man with a five- 
dollar bill. He took his change and, as he turned to go back to 
the waiting car, two men stepped from around the corner. 
Don Corleone knew immediately what was to happen. 

The two men wore black overcoats and black hats pulled 
low to prevent identification by witnesses. They had not 
expected Don Corleone’s alert reaction. He dropped the bag of 
fruit and darted towards the parked car with startling quickness 
for a man of his bulk. At the same time he shouted, ‘ Fredo, 
Fredo. * It was only then that the two men drew their guns and 
fired. 

The first bullet caught Don Corleone in the back. He felt the 
hammer shock of its impact but made his body move towards 
the car. The next two bullets hit him in the buttocks and sent 
him sprawling in the middle of the street. Meanwhile the two 
gunmen, careful not to slip on the roiling fruit, staited to 
follow in order to finish him off. At that moment, perhaps no 
more than five seconds after the Don’s call to his son, Frede- 
rico Corleone appeared out of his car, looming over it. The 
gunmen fired two more hasty shots at the Don lying in the 
gutter. One hit him in the fleshy part of his arm and the second 
hit him in the calf of his right leg. Though these wounds were 
the least serious they bled profusely, forming small pools of 
blood beside his body- But by this time Don Corleone had lost 
consciousness. 

Freddie had heard his father shout, calling him by his child- 
hood name, and then he had heard the first two loud reports. 
By the time he got out of the car he was in shock, he had not 
even drawn his gun. The tw^o assassins could easily have shot 
him down. But they too panicked. They must have known the 
son was armed, and besides too much time had passed. They 
disappeared around the corner, leaving Freddie alone in the 
street with his father’s bleeding body. Many of the people 
thronging the avenue had flung themselves into doorways 



or on the ground, others had huddled together in small 
groups, 

Fr^dic still had not drawn his weapon. He seemed stunned. 
He stared down at his father’s body lying face down on the 
tarred street, lying now in what seemed to him a blackish lake 
of blood. Freddie went into physical shock. People eddied out 
again and someone, seeing him start to sag, led him to the 
kerbstone and made him sit down on it. A crowd gathered 
around Don Corleone’s body, a circle that shattered when the 
first police car sirened a path through them. Directly behind 
the police was the Daily News radio car and even before it 
stopped a photographer jumped out to snap pictures of the 
bleeding Don Corleone. A few moments later an ambulance 
arrived. Tlic photographer turned his attention to Freddie 
Corleone, who was now weeping openly, and this was a 
curiously comical sight, because of his tough, Cupid-fcatured 
face, heavy nose and thick mouth smeared with snot. Detec- 
tives were spreading through the crowd and more police cars 
were coming up. One detective knelt beside Freddie, ques- 
tioning him, but Freddie was too deep in shock to answer. The 
detective reached inside Freddie’s coat and lifted his wallet. 
He looked at the identification inside and whistled to his 
partner. In just a few seconds Freddie had been cut o£f from 
the crowd by a flock of plainclothesmcn. The first detective 
found Freddie’s gun in its shoulder holster and took it. Then 
they lifted Freddie oflF his feet and shoved him into an un- 
marked car. A.S that car pulled away it was followed by the 
Dalfy News radio car. The photographer was still snapping 
pictures of everybody and everything. 

• 

In the half hour after the shooting of his father. Sonny 
Corleone received five phone calls in rapid succession. The 
first was from Detective John Phillips, who was on the family 
payroll and had been in the lead car- of plainclothesmcn at the 
scene of the shooting. The first thing he said to Sonny over the 
phone was, ‘Do you recognize my voice?' 

‘Yeah,’ Sonny said. He was fresh from a nap, called to the 
phone by his wife. 

Phillips said quickly without preamble, ‘Somebody shot 

85 



your fiithet outside his pkoe. Fifteen minutes ago. He*s alive 
but hwt bad. They’ve n^en him to Fiench Hospital. They got 
your brother Freddie down at the Chelsea precdnct. You better 
get him a doctor when they turn him loose. I’m going down to 
the hospital now to help question your old man» if he can talk. 
I’ll keep you posted.’ . 

Across the table, Sonny’s wife Sandra noticed that her 
husband’s face had gone red with flushing blood. His eyes 
were glazed over. She whispered, ^What’s the matter?’ He 
waved at her impatiently to shut up, swung his body away so 
that his back was towards her and said into the phone, * You 
sure he’s alive?’ 

* Yeah, I’m sure,* the detective said. ‘A lot of blood but I 
think maybe he’s not as bad as he looks.* 

‘Thanka,’ Sonny said. ‘Be home tomorrow morning eight 
sharp. You got a grand coming.’ 

Sonny cradled the phone. He forced himself to sit sdll. He 
knew that his greatest weakness was his anger and this was one 
time when anger could be fatal. The first thing to do was get 
Tom Hagen. But before he could pick up the phone, it rang. 
The call was from the bookmaker licensed by the Family to 
operate in the district of the Don’s office. The bookmaker had 
called to tell him that the Don had been kiUed, shot dead in the 
street. After a few questions to make sure that the bookmaker’s 
informant had not been dose to the body. Sonny dismissed the 
information as incorrect. Phillips’ dope would be more 
accurate. The phone rang almost immediately a third time. It 
was a reporter from the Daily News. As soon as he identified 
himself. Sonny Corleone hung up. 

He dialled Hagen’s house and asked Hagen’s wife, ‘Did 
Tom come home yet?’ She said, ‘No,’ that he was not due for 
another twenty minutes but she expected him home for 
supper. ‘Have him call me,’ Sonny said. 

He tried to think things out. He tried to imagine how his 
father would react in a like situation. He had ^own imme- 
diately that this was an attack by SoUozzo, but Sollozzo would 
never have dared to eliminate so high-ranking a leader as the 
Don unless he was backed by other powerful people. The 
phone, ringing for the fourth dme, interrupted his droughts. 

84 



Tlie Toke oo the ocher end w«s very soft, very gende. 
^Sendno Codeone?* it tsked. 

*Yeah/ Sonny stuL 

* We have Tom Hagen/ the yolce said. 'In about three hours 
he*U be released with our proposidon. Don't do anything rash 
until you've heard what he has to say. You can only cause a lot 
of trouble. What's done is done. Everybody has to be sensible 
now. Don't lose that famous temper yours.' The voice was 
slightly mocking. Sonny couldn't be sure, but it sounded like 
Sollozzo. He made his voice sound muted, depressed. 'I’U 
wait/ he said. He heard the receiver on the other end dick. 
He k>oked at his heavy gold-banded wristwatch and noted 
the exact time of the call and jotted it down on the table- 
doth. 

He sat at the kitch^ table, frowning. His wife asked, 
*Sonny, what is it?' He told her calmly. 'They shot the old 
man.' ^en he saw the shock on her face he said roughly, 
'Don't worry, he’s not dead. And nothing else is going to 
happen.' He ^d not tell her about Hagen, ^d then the phone 
rang for the fifth time. 

It was Qemenza. The fat man's voice came wheeaing over 
the phone in gruntlike gasps. 'You hear about your father?' 
he asked. 

'Yeah,* Sonny said. 'But he’s not dead,’ There was a long 
pause over the phone and then Clemenxa's voice came packed 
with emotion, 'Thank God, thank God.' Then anxiously, 
'You sure? I got word he was dead in the street.' 

'He’s alive,’ Sonny said. He was listening intently to every 
intonation in Qemenza’s voice. The emotion had seemed 
genuine but it was part of the fat man's profession to be a good 
actor. 

'You'D have to carry the baD, Sonny,' Qemenza said. 'What 
do you want me to do?' 

'Get over to my father's house,’ Sonny said. 'Bring Paulie 
Gatto.' 

'That's aU?’ Gemenza asked. 'Don't you want me to send 
some people to the hospital and your place?' 

'No, 1 just want you and Paulie Gatto,' Sonny said. There 
was a long pause. Qemenza was getting the message. To make 



it a little more natural. Sonny asked, ‘Where the hell was 
Paulie anyway? What the hell was he doing?’ 

There was no longer any wheezing on the other end of the 
line. Clemcnza’s voice was guarded. ‘ Paulie was sick, he had a 
cold, so he stayed home. He’s been a little sick all winter,’ 

Sonny was instantly alert. ‘How many times did he stay 
home the last couple of months?’ 

‘Maybe three or four times,’ Clemenza said. ‘I always asked 
Freddie if he wanted another guy but he said no. There’s 
been no cause, the last ten years things been smooth, you 
know.’ 

‘Yeah,’ Sonny said. ‘I’ll see you at my father’s house. Be 
sure you bring Paulie. Pick him up on your way over. I don’t 
care how sick he is. You got that?’ He slammed down the 
phone without waiting for an answer. 

His wife was weeping silently. He stared at her for a 
moment, then said in a harsh voice, ‘Any of our people call, 
tell them to get me in my father’s house on his special phone. 
Anybody else call, you don’t know nothing. If Tom’s wife 
calls, tell her that Tom won’t be home for a while, he’s on 
business.’ 

He pondered for a moment. ‘A couple of our people will 
come to stay here.’ He saw her look of fright and said im- 
patiently, ‘You don’t have to be scared, I just want them 
here. Do whatever they tell you to do. If you wanta talk to me, 
get me on Pop’s special phone but don’t call me unless 
it’s really important. And don’t worry.’ He went out of the 
house. 

Darkness had fallen and the December wind whipped 
through the mall. Sonny had no fear about stepping out into 
the riight. All eight houses were owned by Don Corleone. At 
the mouth of the mall the two houses on either side vrere 
rented by family retainers with their own families and star 
boarders, single men who lived in the basement apartments. 
Of the remaining six houses that formed the rest of the half 
circle, one was inhabited by Tom Hagen and his family, his 
own, and the smallest and least ostentatious by the Don him- 
self. The other three houses were given rent-free to retired 
friends of the Don with the understanding that they would be 

86 



vacated whenever he requested. The harmless-looking mall 
was an impregnable fortress. 

All eight houses were equipped with floodlights which 
bathed the grounds around them and made the mall impossible 
to lurk in. Sonny went acrc;ss tiic street to his father’s house 
and let himself inside with his own key. He yelled out, ‘Ma, 
whcie are you?’ and his mother came out of the kitchen. 
Behind her rose the smell of frying peppers. Before she could 
say an3''thing. Sonny took her by the arm and made her sit 
down. ‘I just got a call,’ he said. ‘Now don’t get worried. 
Pop's in the hospital, he’s iiurt. Get dressed and get ready to 
get down there. I’ll have a car and a driver for you in a little 
while. OK?’ 

His mother looked at him steadily for a moment and then 
asked in Italian, ‘Have they shot him?’ 

Scjnny nodded. His mother bowed her head for a moment. 
I'hea she went back into the kitchen. Sonny followed her. He 
watched her turn off the gas under the panful of peppers and 
then go out and up to the bedroom. He took peppers from the 
pan and bread from the basket on the table and made a sloppy 
sand wichv^ with hot olive oil dripping from his fingers. He 
went into the huge corner room that wai, his father’s office and 
took the special phone from a locked cabinet box. The phone 
had been especially installed and was listed under a phony 
name and a phony address. The first person he called was Luca 
Brasi. There was no answer. Then he called the safety-valve 
caporegime in Brooklyn, a man of unquestioned loyalty to the 
Don. This man’s name was Tessio. Sonny told him what had 
happened and what he wanted. Tessio was to recruit fifty 
absolutely reliable men. He was to send guards to the hospital, 
he was to send men out to Long Beach to work there. Tessio 
asked, ‘Did they get Clemenza too?’ Sonny said, ‘I don’t want 
to use Clemcnza’s people right now.’ Tessio understood im- 
mediately, there was a pause, and then he said, ‘Excuse me. 
Sonny, I say this as your father would say it. Don’t move too 
fast. I can’t believe Clemenza would betray us.* 

‘Thanks,’ Sonny said. ‘I don’t think so but 1 have to be 
careful. Right?’ 

‘Right,’ Tessio said. 


87 



^Another thing/ Sonny said. *My kid brother Mike goes to 
college in Hanover, New Hampshire. Get some people we 
know in Boston to go up and get him and bring him down 
here to the house un^ this blows over. I’ll call him up so he’ll 
expect them. Again I’m just playing the percentages, just to 
make sure.’ 

^OK/ Tessio said, ‘I’ll be over your father’s house as soon 
as I get things rolling. OK? You Imow my boys, right?’ 

‘Yeah,’ Sonny said. He hung up. He went over to a small 
wall safe and unlocked it. From it he took an indexed book 
bound in blue leather. He opened it to the T’s until he found 
the entry he was looking for. It read, ‘Ray Farrell $5,000 
Christmas Eve.’ This was followed by a telephone number. 
Sonny dialled the number and said, ‘Farrell?’ The man on the 
other end answered, ‘Yes.’ Sonny said, ‘This is Santino 
Corleone. I want you to do me a favour and I want you to do 
it right away. I want you to check two phone numbers and 
give me all the calls they got and all the calls they made for the 
last three months.’ He gave Farrell the number of Paulie 
Gatto’s home and Gemenza’s home. Then he said, ‘This is 
important. Get it to me before midnight and you’ll have an 
extra very Merry Christmas.’ 

Before he settled back to think things out he gave Luca 
Brasi’s number one more call. Again there was no answer. 
This worried him but he put it out of his mind. Luca would 
come to the house as soon as he heard the news. Sonny leaned 
back in the swivel chair. In an hour the house would be 
swarming with Family people and he would have to tell them 
all what to do, and now t^t he finally had time to think he 
realized how serious the situation was. It was the first challenge 
to the Corleone Family and their power in ten years. There was 
no doubt that SoUozzo was behind it, but he would never have 
dared attempt such a stroke unless he had support from at least 
one of the five great New York fiunilies. And that support 
must have come from the Tattaglias. Which meant a full-scale 
war or an unmediate settlement on SoUozzo’s terms. Sonny 
smiled grimly. The wily Turk had planned well but he had 
been unlucky. The old man was alive and so it was war. With 
Luca Brasi and the resources of the Co d eonc Family there 


88 



could be but one outcome. But again the nagging woiry. 
Where was Luca Biasi? 


CHAPTER THREE 


Counting the driver, there were four men in the car with 
Hagen. They put him in the back seat, in the middle of the two 
men who had come up behind him in the street. Solloazo sat 
up front. The man on Hagen’s right reached over across his 
body and tilted Hagen’s hat over his eyes so that he could not 
sec. ‘Don’t even move your pinkie,’ he said. 

It was a short ride, not more than twenty minutes and when 
they got out of the*car Hagen could not recognize the neigh- 
bourhood because darkness had fallen. They led him into a 
basement apartment and made him sit on a straight-backed 
kitchen chair. Sollozzo sat across the kitchen table from him. 
His dark face had a peculiarly vulterine look. 

‘I don’t want you to be afraid,’ he said. ‘I know you’re not 
in the muscle end of the Family. I want you to help the 
Corleones and 1 want you to help me.’ 

Hagen’s hands were shaking as he put a cigarette in his 
mouth. One of the men brought a bottle of rye to the table and 
gave him a slug of it in a china coffee cup. Hagen drank the 
fiery liquid gratefully. It steadied his h^ds and took the 
weakness out of his legs. 

‘Your boss is dead,’ SoUozzo said. He paused, surprised at 
the tears that sprang to Hagen’s eyes. Then he went on. ‘ We 
got him outside his office, in the street. As soon jis I got the 
word, I picked you up. You have to make the peace between 
me and Sonny.’ 

Hagen didn’t answer. He was surprised at his own grief. 
And the feeling of desolation mixed with his fear of 
death. S0II0220 was speaking again. ‘ Sonny was hot for my deal. 
Right? You know it’s the smart thing to do too. Narcotics is 
the coming thing. There’s so much money in it that everybody 
can get rich just in a couple of years. The Don was an old 

$9 



“Moustache Pete’\ his day was over but he didn’t know it. 
Now he’s dead, nothing can bring him back. I’m ready to 
make a new deal, I want you to talk Sonny into taking it.’ 

Magen said, ‘You haven’t got a chance. Sonny will come 
after you with everything he’s got.’ 

Sollozzo said impatiently, ‘That’s gonna be his first reaction. 
You have to talk some sense to him. The Tattaglia Family 
stand behind me with all their people. The other New York 
Families will go along with anything that will stop a full-scale 
war between us. Our war has to hurt them and their businesses. 
If Sonny goes along with the deal, the other Families in the 
country will consider it none of their afiair, even the Don’s 
oldest friends.* 

Hagen stared down at his hands, not answering. Sollozzo 
went on persuasively, ‘ The Don was slipping. In the old days 
I could never have^ot to him. The other Families distrust him 
because he made you his Consigiiori and you’re not even Italian, 
much less Sicilian. If it goes to all-out war the Corleone Family 
will be smashed and everybody loses, me included. I need the 
Family political contacts more than I need the money even. So 
talk to Sonny, talk to the caporegimes\ you’ll save a lot of blood- 
shed.’ 

Hagen held out his china cup for more whisky. ‘I’ll try,’ he 
said. ‘But Sonny is strong-headed. And even Sonny won’t be 
able to call off Luca. You have to worry about Luca. /V/have 
to worry about Luca if I go for your deal.’ 

Sollozzo said quietly, ‘I’ll take care of Luca. You take care 
of Sonny and the other two kids. Listen, you can tell them that 
Freddie would have got it today with his old man but my 
people had strict orders not to gun him. 1 didn’t want any 
more hard feelings than necessary. You can tell them that, 
Freddie is alive because of me.’ 

Finally Hagen’s mind was working. For the first time he 
really believed that Sollozzo did not mean to kill him or hold 
him as a hostage. The sudden relief from fear that flooded his 
body made him flush with shame. Sollozzo watched him with 
a quiet understanding smile. Hagen began to think things out. 
If he did not agree to argue Sollozzo’s case, he might be killed. 
But then he realized that Sollozzo expected him only to 


90 



present it and present it properly, as he was bound to do as a 
responsible Consigiiori. And now, thinking about it, he also 
realized that SoUozzo was right. An unlimited war between the 
Tattaglias and the Corleones must be avoided at all costs. The 
Corleones must bury their dead and forget, make a deal. And 
then when the time was right they could move against Sollozzo. 

But glancing up, he realized that Sollozzo knew exactly 
what he was thinking. The Turk was smiling. And then it 
struck Hagen. What had happened to Luca Brasi that Sollozzo 
was so unconcerned? Had Luca made a deal? He remembered 
that on the night Don Corleone had refused Sollozzo, Luca 
had been summoned into the office for a private conference 
with the Don. But now was not the time to worry about such 
details. He had to get back to the safety of the Corleone Family 
fortress in Long Beach. ‘TU do my best/ he said to Sollozzo. 
‘I believe you’re right, it’s even what the Don would want us 
to do.’ 

Sollozzo nodded gravely. ‘Fine,’ he said. ‘I don’t like blood- 
shed, I’m a businessman and blood costs too much money.’ 
At that moment the phone rang and one of the men sitting 
behind Hagen went to answer it. He listened and then said 
curtly, ‘OK, I’ll tell him.’ He hung up the phone, went to 
Sollozzo’s side and whispered in the Turk’s ear. Hagen saw 
Sollozzo’s face go pale, his eyes glitter with rage. He himself 
felt a thrill of fear. Sollozzo was looking at him speculatively 
and suddenly Hagen knew that he was no longer going to be 
set free. That something had happened that might mean his 
death. Sollozzo said, ‘ The old man is still alive. Five bullets in his 
Sicilian hide and he’s still alive.’ He gave a fatalistic shrug. ‘ Bad 
luck,' he said to Hagen. ‘Bad luck for me. Bad luck for you.’ 


CHAPTER FOUR 

Whkn Michael Corleone arrived at his father’s house in Long 
Beach he found the narrow entrance mouth of the mall 
blocked off with a link chain. The mall itself was bright with 

91 



the floodlights of all eight houses, outlining at least ten cars 
t>arked along the curving cement walk. 

Two men he didn't know were leaning against the chain. 
One of them asked in a Brooklyn accent, * Who'rc you?* 

He told them. Another man came out of the nearest house 
and peered at his face. * That’s the Don’s kid,* he said. *l’ll 
bring him inside.’ Mike followed this man to his father’s 
house, where two men at the door let him and his escort pass 
inside. 

The house seemed to be full of men he didn’t know, until he 
went into the living room. There Michael saw Tom Hagen’s 
wife, Theresa, sitting stiflly on the sofa, smoking a cigarette. 
On the coflee table in front of her was a glass of whisky. On 
the other side of the sofa sat the bulky Clememca. The eapm9- 
face was impassive, but he was sweating and the dgar 
in his hand glistened slickly black with his saliva. 

Gemenaa came to wri^g his hand in a consoling way, 
muttering, *Yout mother u at the hospital with your father, 
he’s going to be all right!* Paulie Gatto stood up to shake 
hands. Michael looked at him curiously. He knew Paulie was 
his father’s bodyguard hht did not know that Paulie had 
stayed home sick that day. But he sensed tension in the thin 
dark face. He knew Gatto’s reputation as an up-and-coming 
man, a very quick man who knew how to get delicate )obs 
done without complications, and today he had failed in his 
duty. He noticed several other men in the comers of the room 
but he did not recogniae them. They were not of Gemenaa’s 
people. Michael put these facts together and understood. 
Gemenza and Gatto were suspect. Thinking that Paulie had 
been at the scene, he asked the ferret-faced young man, *^How 
is Freddie? He OK?’ 

*The doctor gave him a shot,’ Gemenza said. ‘He’s sleep- 
ing.’ 

Michael went to Hagen’s wife and bent down to kiss her 
check. They had always liked each other. He whispered, 
‘Don’t worry, Tom will be OK. Have you talked to Sonny 
yet?’ 

Theresa clung to him for a moment and shook her head. 
She was a delicate, very pretty woman, more American than 


9 ^ 



Italian, and very scared. He took her hand and lifited her ofF die 
sofa. Then he led her into his father’s comet room office. 

Sonny was sprawled out in his chair behind the desk holding 
a yellow pad in one hand and a pencil in the other. The only 
other man in the room with him was the caporegrme Tessio, 
whom Michael recognized and immediately realized that it 
must be his men who were in the house and forming the new 
palace guard. He too had a pencil and pad in his hands. 

When Sonny saw them he came from behind his desk and 
took Hagen’s wife in his arms. ‘Don’t worry, Theresa,’ he 
said. ‘Tom’s OK. They just wanta give him die proposidon, 
they said they’d turn him loose. He’s not on the operating end, 
he’s just out lawyer. There’s no reason for anybody to do him 
harm.’ 

He released Theresa and then to Michael’s surprise he, too, 
got a hug and a kiss on the cheek. He pushed Sonny away and 
said grinning, ‘After I get used to you beating me up I gotta 
put up with this?’ They had often fought when they were 
younger. 

Sonny shrugged. ‘Listen, kid, I was worried when I couldn’t 
get ahold of you in that hick town. Not that I gave a crap if 
they knocked you ofif, but I didn’t like the idea of bringing the 
news to the old lady. 1 had to tell her about Pop.’ 

‘How’d she take it?’ Michael asked. 

‘Good,’ Sonny said. ‘She’s been through it before. Me too. 
You were too young to know about it and then things got 
pretty smooth while you were growing up.’ He paused and 
then said, ‘ She’s down at the hospital with the old man. He’s 
gonna pull through.’ 

‘How about us going down?’ Michael asked. 

Sonny shook his head and said dryly, ‘1 can’f leave this 
house until it’s all over.’ The phone rang. Sonny picked it up 
and listened intently, ^^liilc he was listening Michael sauntered 
over to the desk and glanced down at the yellow pad Sonny 
had been writing on. There was a list of seven names. The first 
three were Sollozzo, Phillip Tattaglia, and John Tattaglia. It 
struck Michael with full force that he had interrupted Sonny 
and Tessio as they were making up a list of men to be killed. 

When Sonny hung up the phone he said to Theresa Hagen 


93 



and Michael, *Can you two wait outside? I got some business 
with Tessio we have to finish/ 

Hagen’s wife said, ‘Was that call about Tom?’ She said it 
almost truculently but she was weeping with fright. Sonny put 
his arm around her and led her to the door. ‘I swear he’s 
going to be OK,’ he said. ‘Wait in the living room. I’ll come 
out as soon as I hear something.* He shut the door behind her. 
Michael had sat down in one of the big leather armchairs. 
Sonny gave him a quick sharp look and then went to sit do\^m 
behind the desk. 

‘You hang around me, Mike,* he said, ‘you’re gonna hear 
things you don’t wanta hear.’ 

Michael lit a cigarette. T can help out,’ he said. 

‘No, you can’t,’ Sonny said. ‘The old man would be sore as 
hell if I let you get mixed up in tliis.* 

Michael stood up and yelled. ‘You lousy bastard, he’s my 
father. I’m not supposed to help him? 1 can help. 1 don’t have 
to go out and kiil people but I can help. Stop treating me like a 
kid brother, 1 was in the war. I got shot, remember? I killed 
some Japs. What the hell do you think I’ll do w^hen you knock 
somebody off? Faint?’ 

Sonny grinned at him. ‘ Pretty soon you’ll want me to put up 
my dukes. OK, stick around, you can handle the phone.’ He 
turned to Tessio. ‘That call I just got gave me dope we 
needed.’ He turned to Michael. ‘Somebody had to finger the 
old man. It could have been Clemenza, it could have been 
Paulie Gatto, who was very conveniently sick today. I know 
the answer now, let’s see how smart you arc, Mike, you’re the 
college boy. V^lio sold out to S0U0220?’ 

Michael sat down again and relaxed back into the leather 
armchair. He thought everything over very carefully. Qc- 
men2a was a caporegime in the Corleone Family structure. Don 
Corleone had made him a millionaire and they had been inti- 
mate friends for over twenty years. He held one of the most 
powerful posts in the organization. What could Clemenza gain 
for betraying his Don? More money? He was rich enough but 
then men are always greedy. More power? Revenge for some 
fancied insult or slight? That Hagen had been made the 
Consiglhri? Or perhaps a businessman’s conviction that 


94 



Sollozzo would win out? No, it was impossible for Clcmcnza 
to be a traitor, and then Michael thought sadly it was only im- 
possible because he didn’t want Clemenza to die. The fat man 
had always brought him gifts when he was growing up, had 
sometimes taken him on outings when tbe Don had been too 
busy. He could not believe that Clemenza was guilty of 
treachery. 

But, on the other hand, Sollozzo would want Clemenza in 
his pocket more than any other man in the Corleone Family. 

Michael thought about Paulie Gatto. Paulie as yet had not 
become rich. He was well thought of, his rise in the organiza- 
tion was certain but he would have to put in liis time like 
everybody else. Also he would have wilder dreams of power, 
as the young always do. It had to be Paulie. And then Michael 
remembered that in tbe sixth grade he and Paulie had been in 
the same class in school and he didn’t want it to be Paulie 
cither. 

He shook his head. * Neither one of them,* be said. But he 
said it only because Sonny had said he had the answer. If it had 
been a vote, he would have voted Paulie guilty. 

Sonny was smiling at him. ‘Don’t worry,* he said. ‘Clemenza 
is OK. It’s Paulie.’ 

Michael could see that Tessio was rcUeved. As a fellow 
caporegime his sympathy would be with Clemenza. Also the 
present situation was not so serious if treachery did not reach 
so high. Tessio said cautiously, ‘Then I can send my people 
home tomorrow?’ 

Sonny said, ‘ The day after tomorrow. I don’t want anybody 
to know about this until then. Listen, I want to talk some 
family business with my brother, personal. Wai\ out in the 
living room, eh ? We can finish our list later. You and Clemenza 
will work together on it.’ 

‘Sure,’ Tessio said. He went out. 

‘How do you know for sure it’s Paulie?* Michael asked. 

Sonny said, ‘ We have people in the telephone company and 
they tracked down all of Paulic’s phone calls in and out. 
Clemenza’s too. On the three days Paulie was sick this 
month he got a call from a street booth across from tbe old 
man’s building. Today too. They were checking to see if 

9J 



Paulie was coming down or somebody was being sent down to 
take his place. Or for some other reason. It doesn’t matter.’ 
Sonny shrugged. * Thank God it was Paulie. We’ll need 
Clemenza bad.’ 

Michael asked hesitantly^ ‘Is it going to be an all-out war?* 

Sonny’s eyes were hard. ‘That’s how I’m going to play it as 
soon as Tom checks in. Until the old man tells me different.’ 

Michael asked, ‘ So why don’t you wait until the old man can 
tell you?’ 

Sonny looked at him curiously. ‘ How the hell did you win 
those combat medals? We are under the gun, man, we gotta 
fight. I’m just afraid they won’t let Tom go.* 

Michael was surprised at this. ‘Why not?’ 

Again Sonny’s voice was patient. ‘They snatched Tom 
because they figured the old man was finished and they could 
make a deal with me and Tom would be the sit-down guy in 
the preliminary stages, carry the proposition. Now with the 
old man alive they know I can’t make a deal so Tom’s no good 
to them. They can turn him loose or dump him, depending 
how Sollozzo feels. If they dump him, it would be just to show 
08 they really mean business, trying to bulldoze us.’ 

Michael said quiedy, ‘What made S0II0220 think he could 
get a deal with you?’ 

Sonny flushed and he didn’t answer for a moment. Then he 
said, ‘ We had a meeting a few months ago, S0II0Z20 came to 
us with a proposition on drugs. The old man turned him 
down. But during the meeting I shot off my mouth a little, I 
showed I wanted the deal. Which is absolutely the wrong 
thing to do; if there’s one thing the old man hammered into 
me it’s never to do a thing like that, to let other people know 
there*^ a split of opinion in the Family. So Sollozzo figures he 
gets rid of the old man, 1 have to go in with him on the drugs. 
With the old man gone, the Family power is cut at least in half. 
1 would be fighting for my life anyway to keep all the busi- 
nesses the old man got together. Drugs are the coming thing, 
we should get into it. And his knocking off the old man is 
purely business, nothing personal. As a matter of business 1 
would go in with him. Of course he would never let me get 
too close, he’d make sure I’d never get a clean shot at him, just 

96 



in case. But he also knows that once I accepted the deal the 
other Families would never let me start a war a couple of years 
later just for revenge. Also, the Tattaglia Family is behind 
him .* 

‘If they had got the old man, what would you have 
done?’ Michael asked. 

Sonny said very simply, * S0II0220 is dead meat. I don’t care 
what it costs. I don’t care if we have to fight all the five 
Families in New York. The Tattaglia Family is going to be 
wiped out. I don’t care if we all go down together.’ 

Michael said softly, ‘ That’s not how Pop would have played 
it.’ 

Sonny made a violent gesture. ‘I know I’m not the man he 
was. But I’ll tell you this and he’ll tell you too. When it comes 
to real action I can operate as good as anybody, short-range. 
S0II0220 knows that and so do Clemen2a and Tessio. 1 “made 
my bones ” when 1 was nineteen, the last time the Family had a 
war, and I was a big help to the old man. So I’m not worried 
now. And our Family has all the horses in a deal like this. I just 
wish we could get contact with Luca.’ 

Michael asked curiously, .‘Is Luca that tough, like they say? 
Is he that good?’ 

Sonny nodded. ‘He’s in a class by himself. I’m going to send 
him after the three Tattaglias. I’U get S0II0220 myself.’ 

Michael shifted uneasily in his chair. He looked at his older 
brother. He remembered Sonny as being sometimes casually 
brutal but essentially warmhearted. A nice guy. It seemed 
unnatural to hear him talking this way, it was chilling to see 
the list of names he had scribbled down, men to be executed, 
as if he were some newly crowned Roman Emperor. He was 
glad-that he was not truly part of all this, that novc his father 
lived he did not have to involve himself in vengeance. He’d 
help out, answering the phone, running errands and messages. 
Sonny and the old man could take care of themselves,. especi- 
ally with Luca behind them. 

At that moment they heard a woman scream in the living 
room. Oh, Christ, Michael thought, it sounded like Tom’s 
wife. He rushed to the door and opened it. Everybody In the 
living foom was standing. And by the sofe Tom Hagen was 

97 

God&ther— 4 



holding Theresa close to him, his face embarrassed. Theresa 
was weeping and sobbing, and Michael realized that the 
scream he had heard had been her calling out her husband’s 
name with joy. As he watched, Tom Hagen disentangled him- 
self from his wife’s arms and lowered her back onto the sofa. 
He smiled at Michael grimly. ‘Glad to sec you, Mike, really 
glad.’ He strode into the office without another look at his 
still -sobbing wife. He hadn’t lived with the Corleone Familv 
ten years for nothing, Michael thought with a queer flush 
of pride. Some of the old man had rubbed off on him, as it 
had on Sonny, and he thought, with surprise, even on 
himself. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


It w AS nearly four o’clock in the morning as they all sat in the 
corner room office - Sonny, Michael, Tom Hagen, Clemenza, 
and Tcssio. Theresa Hagen had been persuaded to go to her 
own home next door. Paulie Gatto was still waiting in the 
living room, not knowing that Tessio’s men had been in- 
structed not to let him leave or let him out of their sight. 

Tom Hagen relayed the deal SoUozzo oflercd. He told how 
after SoUozzo had learned the Don still lived, it was obvious 
that he meant to kiU Hagen, Hagen grinned. ‘If I ever plead 
before the Supreme Court, I’ll never plead better than I did 
with that goddamn Turk tonight. I told him I’d talk the 
Family into the deal even though the Don was alive. I told 
him I could wrap you around ray finger. Sonny. How we were 
buddies as kids; and don’t get sore, but I let him get the idea 
that maybe you weren’t too sorry about getting the old man’s 
job, God forgive me.’ He smiled apologetically at Sonny, who 
made a gesture signifying that he understood, that it was of no 
consequence. 

Michael, leaning back in his armchair with the phone at his 
right hand, studied both men. When Hagen had entered the 

98 



room Sonny had come rushing to embrace him. Michael 
realized with a faint twinge of jealousy that in many ways 
Sonny and Tom Hagen were closer than he himself could ever 
be to his own brother. 

* Let’s get down to business/ Sonny said. * We have to make 
plans. Take a look at this list me and Tessio made up. Tessio, 
give Clemenza your copy.’ 

‘If we make plans/ Michael said, 'Freddie should be here.’ 

Sonny said grimly, ‘Freddie is no use to us. The doctor 
says he’s in shock so bad he has to have complete rest. 1 don’t 
understand that. Freddie was always a pretty tough guy. 1 
guess seeing the old man gunned down was hard on him, he 
always thought the Don was God. He wasn’t like you and me, 
Mike.’ 

Hagen said quickly, ‘ O K, leave Freddie out. Leave him out 
of everything, absolutely everything. Now, Sonny, until this 
is all over I think you should stay in the house. 1 mean never 
leave it. You’re safe here. Don’t underrate Sollozzo, he’s got 
to be a pe^pfiovantt^ a real .90 calibre. Is the hospital covered?’ 

Sonny nodded. ‘The cops have it locked in and I got my 
people there visiting Pop all the time. What do you think of 
that list, Tom?’ 

Hagen frowned down at the list of names. ‘Jesus Christ, 
Sonny, you’re really taking this personal. The Don would 
consider it a purely business dispute. Sollozzo is the key. Get 
rid of Sollozzo and everything fdls in line. You don’t have to 
go after the Tattaglias.’ 

Sonny looked at his two caporegimes. Tessio shrugged. ‘It’s 
tricky,’ he said. Qemenza didn’t answer at all. 

Sonny said to Qemenza, ‘One thing w'e can tgke care of 
without discussion. I don’t want Paulie around here any more. 
Make that first on your list.’ The fat caporegime nodded. 

Hagen said, '\^at about Luca? Sollozzo didn’t seem 
worried about Luca. That worries me. If Luca sold us out, we’re 
in real trouble. That’s the first thing we have to know. Has 
anybody been able to get in touch with him?’ 

‘No,’ Sonny said. ‘I’ve been calling him all night. Maybe 
he’s shacked up.* 

‘No,’ Hagen said. ‘He never sleeps over with a broad. He 

99 



always goes home when he’s thtoogli* M&e» keq> ringifig his 
number until you get an answer/ Michael dutifully picked up 
the phone and dialled. He could hear the phone ringing on tlK 
other end but no one answered. Finally he hung up. ‘Keep 
trying every fifteen minutes/ Hagen said. 

Sonny said impatiendy, ‘OK, Tom you’re the Consigiiori^ 
how about some advice? What the hell do you think we should 
do?’ 

Hagen helped himself to the whisky bottle on the desk. 
‘We negotiate with Solloazo tmtil your father is in shape to 
take charge. We might even make a deal if we have to. ^^en 
your hither gets out of bed he can setde the whole business 
without a fuss and all the Families will go along with him.’ 

Sonny said angrily, ‘You think 1 can’t handle this guy 
SoUozao?’ 

Tom Hagen looked him directly in the eye. ‘ Sonny, sure you 
can outfight him. The Corleone Family has the power. You 
have Clemenza and Tessio here and they can muster a thousand 
men if it comes to an all-out war. But at the end there will be a 
shambles over the whole East Coast and all the other Families 
will blame the Corleones. We’ll make a lot of enemies. And 
that’s something your father never believed in.’ 

Michael, watching Soimy, thought he took this well. But 
then Sonny said to Hagen, ‘What if the old man dies, what do 
you advise then, ConsiglioriV 

Hagen said quietly, ‘I know you won’t do it, but 1 would 
advise you to make a real deal with Sollozzo on the drugs. 
Without your father’s political contacts and personal influence 
the Corleone Family loses half its stieng^. Without your 
father, the other New York Families might wind up support- 
ing the Tattaglias and SoUozzo just to make sure there isn’t a 
long destructive war. If your father dies, make the deal. Then 
wait and see/ 

Sonny was white-faced with anger. ‘ That’s easy for you to 
say, it’s not your father they killed.’ 

Hagen said quickly and proudly, ‘1 was as good a son to 
him as you or Mike, maybe better. I’m giving you a profes- 
sional opinion. Personally I want to kill ail those basUrds.’ 
The emotion in his voice shamed Sonny, who said, ‘Oh, 


lOO 



Chritt, Tom, 1 didn’t mmn it that wmy* But he had, ceally. 
Blood was blood and nothing dte was its equal. 

Sonny brooded for a moment as the others waited in em* 
barrassed silence. Then he sighed and spoke quietly. ’OK, 
we’ll sit tight until the old man can give us the lead. But, Tom, 
1 want you to stay inside the mall, too. Don’t take any chances. 
Mike, you be careful, though I don’t think even SoUozao 
would bring personal family into the war. Everybody would 
be against him then. But be careful. Tessio, you hold your 
people in reserve but have them nosing around the city. Qe- 
menza, after you settle the Paulic Gatto thing, you move your 
men into the house and the mall to replace Tessio’s people. 
Tessio, you keep your men at the hospital, though. Tom, start 
negotiation over the phone or by messenger with SoUozzo and 
the Tattaglias the first thing in the morning. Mike, tomorrow 
you take a couple of Qemenza’s people and go to Luca’s house 
and wait for him to show up or find out where the hell he is. 
That crazy bastard might be going after Sollozzo right now if 
he’s heard the news. 1 can’t believe he’d ever go against hia 
Ocm, no matter what the Turk ofiered him.’ 

Hagen said reluctantly, ’Maybe Mike shouldn’t get mised 
op in this so directly.’ 

’Right,’ Sonny said. ’Forget that, Mike. Anyway 1 need you 
on the phone here in the bouse, that’s more important.’ 

Michael didn’t say anything. He. felt awkward, almost 
ashamed, and he noticed Qemenza and Tessio with faces so 
carefully impassive ihat he was sure that they were hiding 
their contempt. He picked up the phone and dialled Luca 
Brasi’s numb^ and kept the receiver to his car as it rang and 
tang. 


CHAPTER SIX 

Peter Clemenz A slept badly thatnight. In the morning he got 
up early and made his own breakfast of a glass of grappa^ a 
thick slice of Genoa salami with a chunk of fresh Italian bread 


lOl 



that was still delivered to his door as in the old days. Then he 
drank a great, plain china mug filled with hot coffee that had 
been laced with anisette. But as he padded about the house in 
his old bathrobe and red felt slippers he pondered on the day’s 
work that lay ahead of him. Last night Sonny Corleone had 
made it very dear that Paulie Gatto was to be taken care of 
immediately. It had to be today. 

Clemenza was troubled. Not because Gatto had been his 
protege and had turned traitor. This did not reflect on the 
t,aporeffme*s judgement. After all, Paulie’s background had 
been perfect He came from a Sicilian family, he had grown up 
in the same neighbourhood as the Corleone children, had 
indeed even gone to school with one of the sons. He had been 
brought up through each levd in the proper manner. He had 
been tested and not found wanting. And then after he had 
'made his bones’ he had received a good living from the 
Family, a percentage of an East Side ‘ book ’ and a union pay- 
roll slot. Qemen2a had not been unaware that Paulie Gatto 
supplemented his income with freelance stick ups, strictly 
against the Family rules, but even this was a sign of the man’s 
worth. The breaking of such regulations was considered a 
sign of high-spiritedness, like that shown by a fine racing horse 
fighting the reins. 

And Paulie had never caused trouble with his stick ups. 
They had always been meticulously planned and carried out 
with the minimum of fuss and trouble, with no one ever get- 
ting hurt : a three-thousand-doUar Manhattan garment centre 
payroll, a small chinaware factory payroll in the slums of 
Brooklyn. After all, a young man could always use some extra 
pocket money. It was all in the pattern. Who could ever fore- 
tell that Paulie Gatto would turn traitor? 

What was troubling Peter Qemenza this morning was an 
administrative problem. The actual execution of Gatto was a 
cut-and-dried chore. The problem was, who should the 
caporegime bring up from the ranks to replace Gatto in the 
Family? It was an important promotion, that to ‘button’ man, 
one not to be handed out lightly. The man had to be tough and 
he had to be smart. He had to be safe, not a person that would 
talk to the police if he got in trouble, one well saturated in the 


102 



Sicilians’ law of omtrta^ the law of silence. And then, what kind 
of a living would he receive for his new duties ^ Clcmenza had 
several times spoken to the Don about better rewards for the 
all-important button man who was first in the front line when 
trouble arose, but the Don had put him off. If Paulic had been 
making more money, he might have been able to resist the 
blandishments of the wily Turk, Sollo2zo. 

Gemenza finally narrowed down the list of candidates to 
three men. The first was an enforcer who worked with the 
coloured policy bankers in Harlem, a big brawny brute of a 
man of great physical strength, a man with a great deal of 
personal charm who could get along with people and yet 
when necessary make them go in fear of him. But Gemenza 
scratched him off the list after considering his name for a half 
hour. This man got along too well with the black people, 
which hinted at some flaw of character. Also he would be too 
hard to replace in the position he now held. 

The second name Gemenza considered and almost settled 
on was a hard-working chap who served faithfully and well in 
the organization. This man was the collector of delinquent 
accounts for Family-licensed shylocks in Manhattan. He had 
started off as a bookmaker’s runner. But he was not quite yet 
ready for such an important promotion. 

Finally he settled on Rocco Lampone. Lampone had served 
a short but impressive apprenticeship in the Family. During 
thcL war he had been wounded in Africa and been discharged 
in 1943. Because of the shortage of young men, Gemenza had 
taken him on even though Lampone was partially incapaci- 
tated by his injuries and walked with a pronounced limp. Ge- 
menza had used him as a black-market contact in the garment 
centre and with government employees controlling OP A food 
stamps. From that, Lampone had graduated to troubleshooter 
for the whole operation. What Gemenza liked about him was 
his good judgement. He knew that there was no percentage in 
being tough about something that would only cost a heavy 
fine or six months in jail, small prices to pay for the enormous 
profits earned. He had the good sense to know that it was not 
an area for heavy threats but light ones. He kept the whole 
operation in a minor key, which was exactly what was needed. 



Qemenza fdt the relief of a conscientious administrator 
who has solved a knotty personnel problem. Yes, it would be 
Rocco Lampone who would assist. For Gemenza planned to 
handle this job himself, not only to help a new, inexperienced 
man 'make bis bones’, but to settle a personal score with 
Paulie Gatto. Paulie had been his prot^g^, he had advanced 
Paulie over the heads of more deserving and more loyal people, 
he had helped Paulie 'make his bones’ and furthered his career 
in every way. Paulie had not only betrayed the Family, he had 
betrayed his padrone^ Peter Gemenza. This lack of respect had 
to be repaid. 

Everything else was arranged. Paulie Gatto had been in- 
structed to pick him up at three in the afternoon, and to pick 
him up with his own car, nothing hot. Now Gemenza took up 
the telephone and dialled Rocco Lampone’s number. He did 
not identify himself. He simply said, ‘Come to my house, 
I have an errand for you.’ He was pleased to note that 
despite the early hour, Lampone’s voice was not surprised 
or dazed with sleep and he simply said, *OK.’ Good man. 
Gemenza added, ‘No rush, have your breakfast and lunch 
first before you come see me. But not later than two in the 
afternoon,’ 

There was another laconic OK on the other end and 
Gemenza hung up the phone. He had already alerted his 
people about replacing caporegimi Tessio’s people in the Cor- 
leone mall so that was done. He had capable subordinates and 
never interfered in a mechanical operation of that kind. 

He decided to wash his Cadillac. He loved the car. It gave 
him such a quiet peaceful ride, and its upholstery was so rich 
that he sometimes sat in it for an hour when the weather was 
good bexause it was more pleasant than sitting in the house. 
And it always helped him think when he was grooming the 
car. He remembered his father in Italy doing the same thing 
with donkeys. 

Gemenza worked inside the heated garage, he hated cold. 
He ran over his plans. You had to be careful with Paulie, the 
man was like a rat, he could smeU danger. And now of course 
despite being so tough he must be shitting in his pants because 
die old man was still alive. He’d be as skittish as a donkey with 


104 



ants up his ass. But Qemen^a was accustomed to these cir- 
cumstances, usual in his work. First, he had to have a good 
excuse for Rocco to accompany them. Second, he had to have 
a plausible mission for the three of them to go on. 

Of course, strictly speaking, this was not necessary. Paulie 
Gatto could be killed without any of these frills. He was locked 
in, he could not run away. But Clemenaa felt strongly that it 
was important to keep good working habits and never give 
away a fraction of a percentage point. You never could tell 
what might happen and these matters were, after all, questions 
of life and death. 

As he washed his baby-blue Cadillac, Peter Qemen^a pon- 
dered and rehearsed his lines, the expressions of his face. He 
would be curt with Paulie, as if displeased with him. With a 
man so sensitive and suspicious as Gatto this would throw 
him oft' the track or at least leave him uncertain. Undue 
friendliness would make him wary. But of course the curtness 
must not be too angry. It had to be rather an absentminded 
sort of irritation. And why Lampone? Paulie would find that 
most alarming, especially since lampone had to be in the rear 
seat. Paulie wouldn’t like being hdpless at the wheel with 
Lampone behind his head. Clemenza rubbed and polished the 
metal of his Cadillac furiously. It was going to be tricky. Very 
tricky. For a moment he debated whether to recruit another 
man but decided against it. Here he followed basic reasoning. 
In years to come a situation might arise where it might be 
profitable for one of his partners to testify against him. If there 
were just one accomplice it was one’s word against the other. 
But the word of a second accomplice could swing the balance. 
No, they would stick to procedure. • 

What annoyed Qemenza was that the execution had to be 
•public’. That is, the body was to be found. He would have 
much preferred having it disappear. (Usual burying grounds 
were the nearby ocean or the swamplands of New Jersey on 
land owned by fidends of the Family or by other more complic- 
ated methods.) But it had to be public so that embryo traitors 
would be frightened and the enemy warned that the Corleone 
Family had by no means gone stupid of soft, ^ollozzo would 
be made wary by this quick discovery of his spy. The Corleone 


105 



Family would win back some of its prestige. It had been made 
to look foolish by the shooting of the old man, 

Clemenza sighed. The Cadillac gleamed like a huge blue 
steel egg, and he was nowhere near the solving of his prob- 
lem. Then the solution hit him, logical and to the point. It 
would explain Rocco Lampone, himself, and Paulie being 
together and give them a mission of sufficient secrecy and 
importance. 

He would tell Paulie that their job today was to find an 
apartment in case the Family decided to ‘ go to the mattresses ’. 

Whenever a war between the Families became bitterly in- 
tense, the opponents would set up headquarters in secret 
apartments where the ‘soldiers’ could sleep on mattresses 
scattered through the rooms. This was not so much to keep 
their families out of danger, their wives and little children, 
since any attack on noncombatants was undreamed of. All 
parties were too vulnerable to similar retaliation. But it was 
always smarter to live in some secret place where your every- 
day movements could not be charted either by your opponents 
or by some police who might arbitrarily decide to meddle. 

And so usually a trusted caporegime would be sent out to 
rent a secret apartment and fill it with mattresses. That apart- 
ment would be used as a sally port into the city when an 
offensive was mounted. It was ni&tural for Clemenza to be sent 
on such an errand. It was natural for him to take Gatto and 
Lampone with him to arrange all the details, ixicluding the 
furnishing of the apartment. Also, Clemenza thought with a 
grin, Paulie Gatto had proved he was greedy and the first 
thought that would pop into his head was how much he could 
get from Sollozzo for this valuable intelligence. 

Roedb Lampone arrived earl]' and Clemenza explained what 
had to be done and what their roles would be, Lampone’s face 
lit up with surprised gratitude and he thanked Gemenza 
respectfully for the promotion allowing him to serve the 
Family. Gemenza was sure he had done well. He clapped 
Lampone on the shoulder and said, ‘You’ll get something 
better for your living after today. We’ll talk about that later. 
You understand the Family now is occupied with more critical 
matters, more important things to do.’ Lampone made a 

106 



gesture that said he would be patient, knowing his reward was 
certain. 

Clemenza went to his den’s safe and opened it. He took out 
a gun and gave it to Lampone. ‘Use this one,’ he said. ‘They 
can never trace it. Leave it in the car with Paulie. When this 
job is finished I want you to take your wife and children on a 
vacation to Florida. Use your own money now and I’ll pay you 
back later. Relax, get the sun. Use the Family hotel in Miami 
Beach so Fll know where I can get you when I want.’ 

Clemenza’s wife knocked on the door of the den to tell them 
that Paulie Gatto had arrived. He was parked in the driveway. 
Clemenza led the way through the garage and Lampone fol- 
lowed him. When Clemenza got into the front seat with Gatto 
he merely grunted in greeting, an exasperated look on his face. 
He looked at the wrist watch as if he expected to find that 
Gatto was late. 

The ferret-faced button man was watching him intently, 
looking for a clue. He flinched a little 'when Lampone got into 
the rear seat behind him and said, ‘ Rocco, sit on the other side. 
A big guy like you blocks up my rear- view mirror.’ Lampone 
shifted dutifully so that he was sitting behind Clemenza, as if 
such a request was the most natural thing in the world. 

Clemenza said sourly to Gatto, ‘Damn that Sonny, he's 
running scared. He’s already thinking of going to the mat- 
tresses. We have to find a place on the West Side. Paulie, you 
and Rocco gotta staff and supply it until the word comes 
down for the rest of the soldiers to use it. You know a good 
location?’ 

As he had expected, Gatto’s eyes became greedily interested. 
Paulie had swallowed the bait and because he w^^s thinking 
how much the information was worth to Sollozzo, he was for- 
getting to think about whether he was in danger. Also, Lam- 
pone was acting his part perfectly, staring out the window in a 
disinterested, relaxed way. Clemenza congratulated himself on 
his choice. 

Gatto shrugged. T’d have to think about it,’ he said. 

Clemenza grunted. ‘Drive while you think, I want to get to 
New York today.’ 

Paulie was an expert driver and traffic going into the dty 

107 



was light at this time in the afternoon, so the early winter 
darkness was just beginning to fall when they arriTed. There 
was no small talk in the car. Qemenza directed Paulie to drive 
up to the Washington Heights section. He checked a few 
apartment buildings and told him to park near Arthur Avenue 
and wait. He also left Rocco Lampone in the car. He went into 
the Vera Mario Restaurant and had a light dinner of veal and 
salad, nodding his helloes to some acquaintances. After an 
hour had gone by he walked the several blocks to where the 
car was parked and entered it. Gatto and Lampone were still 
waiting. ‘Shit,’ Clemen2a said, ‘they want us back in Long 
Beach. They got some other job for us now. Sonny says we 
can let this one go until later. Rocco, you live in the city, can 
we drop you off? * 

Rocco said quietly, ‘I have my car out at your place and my 
old lady needs it first thing in the morning.’ 

‘That’s right,’ Clemenza said. ‘Then you have to come back 
with us, after all.’ 

Again on the ride back to Long Beach nothing was said. On 
the stretch of road that led into the city, Clemenza said sud- 
denly, ‘Paulie, pull over, I gotta take a leak.’ From working 
together so long, Gatto knew the fat caporegime had a weak 
bladder. He had often made such a request. Gatto pulled the 
car off the highway into the soft earth that led to the swamp. 
Clemenza climbed out of the car and took a few steps into the 
bushes. He actually relieved himself. Then as he opened the 
door to get back into the car he took a quick look up and 
down the highway, 'fhere were no lights, the road was com- 
pletely dark. ‘Go ahead,’ Clemenza said. A second later the 
interior of the car reverberated with the report of a gim. 
Paulie Gatto seemed to jump forward, his body flinging 
against the steering wheel and then slumping over to the seat. 
Clemenza had stepped back hastily to avoid being hit with 
fragments of skull bone and blood. 

Rocco Lampone scrambled out of the back seat. He still 
held the gun and he threw it into the swamp. He and Oemenza 
walked hastily to a car parked nearby and got in. Lampone 
reached underneath the seat and found the key that had been 
left for them. He started the car and drove Qemenza to his 

108 



home. Then instead of going back by the same toute» he took 
the Jones Beach Causeway right on through to the town of 
Merrick and onto the Meadowbrook Parkway until he reached 
the Northern State Parkway. He rode that to the Long Island 
Expressway and then continued on to the Whitestone Bridge 
and through the Bronx to his home in Manhattan. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


On the night before the shooting of Don Corlcone, his 
strongest and most loyal and most feared retainer prepared to 
meet with the enemy. Luca Brasi had made contact with the 
forces of Sollozzo several months before. He had done so on 
the orders of Don Corlcone himself. He had done so by 
frequenting the nightclubs controlled by the Tattaglia Family 
and by taking up with one of their top call girls. In bed with 
this call girl he grumbled about how he was held down in the 
Corleone Family, how his worth was not recognized. After a 
week of this affair with the call girl, Luca was approached by 
Bruno Tattaglia, manager of the nightclub. Bruno was the 
youngest son, and ostensibly not connected with the Family 
business of prostitution. But his famous nightclub with its 
dancing Line of long-stemmed beauties was the finishing school 
for many of the city hookers. 

The ^st meeting was all above-board, Tattaglia offering 
him a job to work in the Family business as enforcer. The 
flirtation went on for nearly a month. Luca played ^his role of 
man infatuated with a young beautiful girl, Bruno Tattaglia 
the role of a businessman trying to recruit an able executive 
from a rival. At one such meeting, Luca pretended to be 
swayed, then said, ‘ But one thing must be understood. 1 will 
never go against the Godfather. Don Corleone is a man 1 re- 
spect. 1 understand that he must put his sons before me in the 
Family business.* 

Bruno Tattaglia was one of the new generation with a barely 
hidden contempt for the old Moustache Petes like Luca Brasi, 


109 



Don Corlcone, and even his own father. He was just a little too 
i-espectful. Now he said, ‘My father wouldn’t expect you to do 
anything against the Corleones. Why should he? Everybody 
gets along with everybody else now, it’s not like the old days. 
It’s just that if you’re looking for a new job, I can pass along 
the word to my father. There’s always need for a man like you 
in our business. It’s a hard business and it needs hard men to 
keep it running smooth. Let me know if you ever make up 
your mind.* 

Luca shrugged. ‘It’s not so bad where I’m at.’ And so they 
ieft it. 

The general idea had been to lead the Tattaglias to believe 
chat he knew about the lucrative narcotics operation and that he 
wanted a piece of it freelance. In that fashion he might hear 
something about Sollozzo’s plans if the Turk had any, or 
whether he was getting ready to step on the toes of Don 
Corlcone. After waiting for two months with nothing else 
happening, Luca reported to the Don that obviously Sol- 
\ozzo was taking his defeat graciously. The Don had told him 
to keep trying but merely as a sideline, not to press it, 

Luca had dropped into the nightclub the evening before 
Don Cotlconc’s being shot. Almost immediately Bruno 
Tattaglia had come to his table and sat down. 

‘ I have a friend who wants to talk to you,’ he said. 

‘ Bring him over,’ Luca said. T’ll talk to any friend of yours.’ 

‘No,’ Bruno said. ‘He wants to see you in private.’ 

‘Who is he?’ Luca asked. 

‘Just a friend of mine,’ Bruno Tattaglia said. ‘He wants to 
put a proposition to you. Can you meet him later on tonight?’ 

‘Sure,’ Luca said. ‘What time and where?’ 

Tattdglia said softly, ‘ The club closes at four in the morning. 
^X'hy don’t you meet in here while the waiters are cleaning 
up?’ 

They knew his habits, Luca thought, they must have been 
checking him out. He usually got up about three or four in the 
afternoon and had breakfast, then amused himself by. gambling 
with cronies in the Family or had a girl. Sometimes he saw one 
of the midnight movies and then would drop in for a drink at 
one of the clubs. He never went to bed before dawn. So the 


no 



suggestion of a four a m meeting was not as outlandish as it 
seemed. 

‘Sure, sure/ he said. ‘Til be back at four.* He left the club 
and caught a cab to his furnished ror)m on Tenth Avenue. He 
boarded with an Italian family to which he was distantly 
related. His two rooms were separated from the rest of their 
railroad flat by a special door. He liked the arrangement 
because it gave him some family life and also protection 
against surprise where he was most vulnerable. 

The sly Turkish fox was going to show his bushy tail, Luca 
thought. If things went far enough, if Sollozzo committed 
himself tonight, maybe the whole thing could be wound up as 
a Christmas present for the Don. In his room, Luca unlocked 
the trunk beneath the bed and took out a bulletproof vest. It 
was heavy. He undressed and put it on over his woollen under- 
wear, then put his shirt and jacket over it. He thought for a 
moment of calling the Don’s house at Long Beach to tell him 
of this new development but he knew the Don never talked 
over the phone, to anyone, and the Don had given him thiy 
assignment in secret and so did not want anyone, not even 
Hagen or his eldest son, to know about it. 

Luca always carried a gun. He had a licence to carry a gun, 
probably the most expensive gun licence ever issued any place, 
any time. It had cost a total of ten thousand dollars but it 
would keep him out of jail if he was frisked by the cops. As a 
top executive operating ofhcial of the Family he rated the 
licence. But tonight, just in case he could finish off the job, he 
wanted a ‘safe’ gun. One that could not possibly be traced. 
But then thinking the matter over, he decided that he would 
just listen to the proposition tonight and report back to the 
Godfather, Don Corleone. 

He made his way back to the club but he did not drink any 
more. Instead he wandered out to 48th Street, where he had a 
leisurely late supper at Patsy’s, his favourite Italian restaurant. 
When it was time for his appointment he drifted uptown to the 
club entrance. The doorman was no longer there when he 
went in. The hat-check girl was gone. Only Bruno Tattaglia 
waited to greet him and lead him to the deserted bar at the side 
of the room. Before him he could see the desert of small tables 


111 



with the polished yellow wood dance floor gleaming like a 
small diamond in the middle of them. In the shadows was the 
empty bandstand, out of it grew the skeleton metal stalk of a 
microphone. 

Luca sat at the bar and Bruno Tattaglia went behind it. 
Luca refused the drink offered to him and lit a cigarette. It was 
possible that this would turn out to be something else, not the 
Turk. But then he saw Sollozzo emerge out of the shadows at 
the far end of the room. 

Solloz2o shook his hand and sat at the bar next to him. 
Tattaglia put a glass in front of the Turk, who nodded his 
thanks. *Do you know who lam?’ asked Sollozxo. 

Luca nodded. He smiled grimly. The rats were being flushed 
out of their holes. It would be his pleasure to take care of this 
renegade Sicilian. 

‘Do you know what I am going to ask of you?’ SoUozzo 
asked. 

Luca shook his head. 

‘There’s big business to be made/ S0II0220 said. ‘I mean 
millions for everybody at the top level. On the first shipment I 
can guarantee you fi^ thousand dollars. I’m talking about 
drugs. It’s the coming thing.’ 

Luca said, ‘Why come to me? You want me to talk to my 
Don?’ 

Solloczo grimaced. ‘Fvc already talked to the Don. He 
wants no part of it. All right, 1 can do without him. But I need 
somebody strong to protect the operation physically. I 
understand you’re not happy 'with your Family, you might 
make a switch.’ 

Luca shrugged. ‘If the o^ is good enough.’ 

S0II0Z20 had been watching him intently and seemed to 
have come to a decision. ‘Think about my offer for a few days 
and then we’ll talk again,’ he said. He put out his hand but 
Luca pretended not to see it and busied himself putting a 
cigarette in his mouth. Behind the bar, Bruno Tattaglia made a 
lighter appear magically and held it to Luca’s cigarette. And 
then he ^d a strange thing. He dropped the lighter on the bar 
and grabbed Luca’s right hand, holding it tight. 

Luca reacted instantly, his body slipping off the bar stool 


iix 



and trying to twist away. But Solloaso had grabbed his other 
hand at the wrist. Still, Luca was too strong for both of them 
and would have broken free except that a man stepped out of 
the shadows behind him and threw a thin silken cord around 
his neck. The cord pulled tight, choking off Lucans breath. His 
face became purple, the strength in his arms drained away. 
Tattaglia and Sollozzo held his hands easily now, and they 
stood there curiously childlike as the man behind Luca pulled 
the cord around Luca’s neck tighter and tighter. Suddenly the 
floor was wet and slippery. Luca’s sphincter, no longer under 
control, opened, the waste of his body spilled out. There was 
no strength in him any more and his legs folded, his body 
sagged. Solloz2o and Tattaglia let his hands go and only the 
strangler stayed with the victim, sinking to his knees to follow 
Luca’s falling body, drawing the cord so tight that it cut 
into the flesh of the neck and disappeared. Luca’s eyes were 
bulging out of his head as if in the utmost surprise and this 
surprise was the only humanity remaining to him. He was 
dead. 

don’t want him found,’ Sollozzo said. ‘It’s important that 
he not be found right now.’ He turned on his heel and left, 
disappearing back into the shadows. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 

The DAT after the shooting of Don Corleone was a busy time 
for the Family. Michael stayed by the phone relaying messages 
to Sonny. Tom Hagen was busy trying to And a mediator satis- 
factory to both parties so that a conference could be arranged 
with Sollozzo. The Turk had suddenly become cagey, perhaps 
he knew that the Family button men of Qemenza and Tessio 
were ranging far and wide over the city in an attempt to pick 
up his trail. But Sollozzo was sticking close to his hideout, as 
were all top members of the TattagOa Family. This was ex- 
pected by Sonny, an elementary precaution he knew the 
enemy was bound to take. 



Clemen2a was tied up with Paulie Gatto. Tessio had been 
given the assignment of trying to track down the whereabouts 
of Luca Brasi. Luca had not been home since the night before 
the shooting, a bad sign. But Sonny could not believe that 
Brasi had either turned traitor or had been taken by surprise. 

Mama Corleonc was staying in the city with friends of the 
Family so that she could be near the hospital. Carlo Rizzi, the 
son-in-law, had offered his services but had been told to take 
care of his own business that Don Corleone had set him up in, 
a lucrative bookmaking territory in the Italian section of Man- 
hattan. Connie was staying with her mother in town so that 
she too could visit her father in the hospital. 

Freddie was still under sedation in his own room of his 
parents’ house. Sonny and Michael had paid him a visit and 
had been astonished at his paleness, his obvious illness. 
‘ Christ,* Sonny said to Michael when they left Freddie’s room, 
*hc looks like he got plugged worse than the old man.* 

Michael shrugged. He had seen soldiers in the same condi- 
tion on the battlefield. But he had never expected it to happen 
to Freddie. He remembered the middle brother as being 
physically the toughest one in the family when all of them were 
kids. But he had also been the most obedient son to his father. 
And yet everyone knew that the Don had given up on this 
middle son ever being important to the business. He wasn’t 
quite smart enough; and failing that, not quite ruthless 
enough. He was too retiring a person, did not have enough 
force. 

Late in the afternoon, Michael got a call from Johnny Fon- 
tanc in Hollywood. Sonny took the phone. ‘Nah, Johnny, no 
use coming back here to see the old man. He’s too sick and it 
would give you a lot of bad publicity, and I know the old man 
wouldri’t like that. Wait until he’s better and vre can move him 
home, then come see him. OK, I’ll give him your regards.’ 
Sonny hung up the phone. He turned to Michael and said, 
‘That’ll make Pop happy, that Johnny wanted to fly from 
California to see how he was.’ 

Late that afternoon, Michael was called to the listed phone 
in the kitchen by one of Clemenza’s men. It was Kay. 

‘Is your father all right?’ she asked. Her voice was a little 



strained, a little unnatural. Michael knew that she couldn’t 
quite believe what had happened, that his father really was 
what the newspapers called a gangster, 

‘He’ll be OK,’ Michael said. 

‘Can I come with you when you visit him in the hospital?’ 
Kay asked. 

Michael laughed. She had remembered him telling her how 
important it was to do such things if you wanted to get along 
with the old Italians. ‘This is a special case,’ he said. ‘If the 
newspaper guys get a hold of your name and background 
you’U be on page three of the Daily Neufj. Girl from old 
Yankee family mixed up with son of big Mafia chief. How 
would your parents like that?’ 

Kay said dryly, ‘My parents never read the Daily Neu/j.' 
Again there was an awkward pause and then she said, ‘You’re 
OK, aren’t you, Mike, you’re not in any danger?* 

Mike laughed again. ‘I’m known as the sissy of the Corleone 
famOy. No threat. So they don’t have to bother coming after 
me. No, it’s all over, Kay, there won’t be any more trouble. 
It was all sort of an accident anyway. I’ll explain when I see 
you.’ 

‘When will that be?’ she asked. 

Michael pondered. ‘How about late tonight? We’ll have a 
drink and supper in your hotel and then I’ll go to the hospital 
and see my old man. I’m getting tired of hanging around here 
answering phones. OK? But don’t tell anybody. I don’t want 
newspaper photographers snapping pictures of us together. 
No Iddding, Kay, it’s damned embarrassing, especially for 
your parents.’ 

‘AU right,’ Kay said. ‘I’ll be waiting. Can I do any Christmas 
shopping for you ? Or anything else ? ’ 

‘No,’ Michael said. ‘Just be ready.’ 

She gave a little excited laugh. ‘I’ll be ready,’ she said. 
‘Aren’t I always?’ 

‘Yes, you are,’ he said. ‘That’s why you’re my best girl.’ 

‘I love you,’ she said. ‘Can you say it?’ 

Michael looked at the four hoods sitting in the kitchen. 
‘No,’ he said. ‘Tonight, OK?’ 

‘OK,’ she said. He hung up. 


”5 



Qcmcnza had finally come back from his day^s work and 
was bustling around the kitchen cooking up a huge pot of 
tomato sauce. Michael nodded to him and went to the corner 
office where he found Hagen and Sonny waiting for him im- 
patiently. ‘Is Clemenza out there?’ Sonny asked. 

Michael grinned. ‘He*s cooking up spaghetti for the troops, 
iust like the army.’ 

Sonny said impatiently, ‘Tell him to cut out that crap and 
come on in here. I have more important things for him to do. 
Get Tessio in here with him.’ 

In a few minutes they were all gathered tn the office. Sonny 
said curtly to Clemenza, ‘You take care of him?’ 

Qemenza nodded. ‘You won’t see him any more.’ 

With a slight electric shock, Michael realized they were 
talking about Paulie Gatto and that little Paulie was dead, 
murdered by that jolly wedding dancer, Clemenza. 

Sonny asked Hagen, ‘You have any luck with Sollozzo?’ 

Hagen shook his head. ‘He seems to have cooled off on the 
negotiation idea. Anyway he doesn’t seem to be too anxious. 
Or maybe he’s just being very careful so that our button men 
won’t nail him. Anyway I haven’t been able to set up a top- 
notch go-between he’ll trust. But he must know he has to 
negotiate now. He missed his chance when he let the old man 
get away from him.’ 

Sonny said, ‘He’s a smart guy, the smartest our Family ever 
came up against. Maybe he figured we’re just stalling until the 
old man gets better or we can get a line on him.’ 

Hagen shrugged. ‘ Sure, be figures that. But he still has to 
negotiate. He has no choice. I’ll get it set up tomorrow. That’s 
certain.’ 

One of Clemenza’s men knocked on the office door and 
then came in. He said to Clemenza, ‘It just came over the 
radio, the cops found Paulie Gatto. Dead in his car.’ 

Qemenza nodded and said to the man, ‘ Don’t worry about 
it.’ The button man gave his capore^mi an astonished look, 
which was followed by a look of comprehension, before he 
went back to the kitchen. 

The conference went on as if there had been no interruption. 
Sonny asked Hagca, ‘Any change in the Don’s condition?’ 

1x6 



Hftgeo shook his head. *He*s OK but he won’t be able to 
talk fbf another couple of days. He’s all knocked out. Still re- 
covering from the operation. Your mother spends most of the 
day with him, Connie too. There’s cops all over the hospital 
and Tessio’s men hang aroimd too, just in case. In a couple of 
days he’ll be all right and then we can see what he wants us to 
do. Meanwhile we have to keep Sollozao from doing anything 
rash. That’s why I want to start you talking deals with him.’ 

Soimy grunted. ‘Until he does, I’ve got Oemenza and 
Tessio "looking for him. Maybe we’ll get lucky and solve the 
whole business.’ 

‘You won’t get lucky,* Hagen said. ‘ ScUoaso is too smart* 
Hagen paused. ‘He knows once he comes to fbe tabic ]>e*& 
have to go our way mpsdy. That’s why lu^s stalling. Fm 
guessing he’s trying to line up support from the other New 
York Families so ^at we won’t go' after him when the oU 
man gives us the word.’ 

Sonny frowned. ‘ Why the hell should they do that? * 

Hagen said patiently, ‘To avert a big war which hurts every- 
body and brings the papers and government into the act. Also, 
Sollozzo will give them a piece of the action. And you know 
how much dough there is in drugs. The Corleone Family 
doesn’t need it, we have the gambling, which is the best 
business to have. But the other Families are hungry. SoUozzo 
is a proven man, they know he can make the operation go on a 
big scale. Alive he’s money in their pockets, dead he’s 
trouble.’ 

Sonny’s face was as Michael had never seen it. The heavy 
Cupid mouth and bronzed skin seemed grey. ‘I don’t give a 
fude what they want. They better not mess in this fight.’ 

Qemenza and Tessio shifted uneasily in their chairs, infantry 
leaders who hear their general rave about storming an im- 
pregnable hill no matter what the cost. Hagen said a little 
impatiently, ‘Come on. Sonny, your father wouldn’t like you 
thinking that way. You know what he always says, “That’s a 
waste. ” Sure, we’re not going to let anybody stop us if the old 
man says we go after Sollozzo. But this is oot a personal thing, 
this is business. If we go after the Turk and the Families inter- 
fere, we’ll negotiate the issue. If the Families see that we’re 



detemuned to have SoUozzo, they’ll let us. The Don will make 
concessions in other areas to square things. But don’t go blood 
crazy on a thing like this. It’s business. Even the shooting of 
your father was business, not personal. You should know that 
by now.’ 

Sonny’s eyes were still hard. ‘OK, I understand all that. Just 
so long as you understand that nobody stands in our way 
when we want SoUozzo.’ 

Sonny turned to Tessio. ‘Any leads on Luca?* 

Tessio shook his head. ‘None at all. SoUozzo must have 
snatched him.’ 

Hagen said quietly, ‘SoUozzo wasn’t worried about Luca, 
which struck me as funny. He’s too smart not to worry about a 
guy like Luca. I think he maybe got him out of the picture, 
one way or the other.’ 

Sonny muttered, ‘Christ, I hope Luca isn’t fighting against 
us. That’s the one thing I’d be afraid of. Clemenza, Tessio, 
how do you two guys figure it?* 

Qemenza said slowly, ‘Anybody could go wrong, look at 
Paulie. But with Luca, he was a man who could only go one 
way. The Godfather was the only thing he believed in, the 
only man he feared. But not only that. Sonny, he respected 
your father as no one else respected him and the Godfather has 
earned respect from everyone. No, Luca would never betray 
us. And I find it hard to believe that a man Uke SoUozzo, no 
matter how cunning, could surprise Luca. He was a man who 
suspected everyone and evcr3rthing. He was always ready for 
the worst. I think maybe he just went off some place for a few 
days. We’ll be hearing from him any time now.’ 

Sonny turned to Tessio. The Brooklyn caporegime shrugged. 
‘Any man can turn traitor. Luca was very touchy. Maybe the 
Don offended him some way. That could be. I think though 
that SoUozzo gave him a little surprise. That fits in with what 
the ConsigHori says. We should expect the worst.’ 

Sonny said to aU of them, ‘SoUozzo should get the word 
soon about Paulie Gatto. How will that affect him?’ 

Qemenza said grimly, ‘It wiU make him think. He wiU 
know the Corlcone Family arc not fools. He wiU realize that he 
was very lucky yesterday.’ 

ii8 



Sonny said sharply, ‘That wasn’t luck. Sollozzo was plan- 
ning that for weeks. They must have tailed the old man to his 
ofHce every day and watched his routine. Then they bought 
Paulic off and maybe Luca. They snatched Tom right on the 
button. They did everything they wanted to do. They were 
unlucky, not lucky. Those button men they hired weren’t good 
enough and the old man moved too quick. If they had killed 
him, I would have had to make a deal and Sollozzo would 
have won. For now. I would have waited maybe and got him 
five, ten years from now. But don’t call him lucky, Pete, that’s 
underrating him. And we’ve done that too much lately.’ ' 

One of the button men brought a bowl of spaghetti in from 
the kitchen and then some plates, forks and wine. They ate as 
they talked. Michael watched in amazement. He didn’t eat and 
neither did Tom, but Sonny, Clemcnza and Tessio dug in, 
mopping up sauce with crusts of bread. It was almost comical. 
They continued their discussion. 

Tessio didn’t think that the loss of Paulie Gatto would upset 
Sollozzo, in fact he thought that the Turk might have antici- 
pated it, indeed might have welcomed it. A useless mouth off 
the payroll. And he would not be frightened by it ; after all, 
would they be in such a situation? 

Michael spoke up diffidently. ‘I know I’m an amateur in 
this, but from everything you guys have said about Sollozzo, 
plus the fact that all of a sudden he’s out of touch with Tom, 
I’d guess he has an ace up his sleeve. He might be ready to puU 
off something real tricky that would put him back on top. If 
we could figure out what that would be, we’d be in the driver’s 
seat.’ 

Sonny said reluctantly, ‘Yeah, I thought of that and the only 
thing 1 can figure is Luca. The word is already out that he’s to 
be brought here before he’s allowed any of his old rights in the 
Family. The only other thing I can think of is that Sollozzo has 
made his deal with the Families in New York and we’ll get the 
word tomorrow that they will be against us in a war. That 
we’ll have to give the Turk his deal. Right, Tom?’ 

Hagen nodded. ‘That’s what it looks like to me. And we 
can’t move against that kind of opposition without your 
father. He’s the only one who can stand against the Families. 


1x9 



He has the political connexions they always need and he can 
use them for trading. If he wants to badly enough.* 

Qemenxa said a little arrogantly for a man whose top button 
man had recently betrayed him» *Sollozzo will never get near 
this house. Boss, you don’t have to worry about that.* 

Soimy looked at him thoughtfully for a moment. Then he 
said to Tessio, *How about the hospital, your men got it 
covered?* 

For the first time during the conference Tessio seemed to be 
absolutely sure of his ground. * Outside and inside,’ he said. 
^ Right around the clock. The cops have it covered pretty good 
too. Detectives ^t the bedroom doot waiting to question the 
old man. That’s a laugh. The Don is still getting that stuff in 
the tubes, no food, so we don’t have to worry about the 
kitchen, which would be something to worry about with those 
Turks, they believe in poison. They can’t get at the Don, not 
in any way.’ 

Sonny tilted back in his chair. *It wouldn’t be me, they have 
to do business with me, they need the Family machine.’ He 
grinned at Michael. wonder if it’s you? Maybe SoUozzo 
figures to snatch you and hold you for a hostage to make a 
deal.’ 

Michael thought ruefully, there goes my date with Kay. 
Sonny wouldn’t let him out of the house. But Hagen said im- 
patiently, ‘No, he could have snatched Mike any time if he 
wanted insurance. But everybody knows that Mike is not in 
the Family business. He’s a civilian and if Sollozzo snatches 
him, then he loses all the other New York Families. Even 
the Tattaglias would have to help hunt him down. No, it’s 
simple enough. Tomorrow we’ll get a representative from 
all the F^amilies who’ll tell us we have to do business with the 
Turk. That’s what he’s waiting for. That’s his ace in the 
hole.’ 

Michael heaved a sigh of relief. ‘Good,’ he said. ‘I have to 
go into town tonight.’ 

‘Why?’ Sormy asked sharply. 

Michael grinned. ‘I figure I’ll drop in to the hospital and 
visit the old man, see Mom and Connie. And 1 got some other 
things to do.’ like the Don, Michael n^er told his real 


lao 



business and now he didn’t want to tell Sonny he was teeing 
Kay Adams. There was no reason not to tell him, it was just 
habit. 

There was a loud murmur of voices in the kitchen. Ckmenza 
went out to sec what was happening. When he came back he 
was holding Luca Brasi’s bulletproof vest in his hands. 
Wrapped in the vest was a huge dead fish. 

Qemenza said dryly, *Thc Turk has heard about his spy 
Paulic Gatto.’ 

Tessio said just as dryly, ‘And now we know about Luca 
Brasi.’ 

Sonny lit a dgai and took a shot of whisky. Michael, be- 
wildered, said, ‘What the hell does that fish mean?’ It was 
Hagen the Irisher, the Consigiioriy who answered him. ‘The 
fish means that Luca Brasi is sleeping on the bottom of the 
ocean,’ he said. ‘It’s an old Sicilian message.’ 


CHAPTER NINE 

When Michael Corleone went into the city that night it was 
with a depressed spirit. He felt that he was being enmeshed in 
the Family business against his will and he resented Sonny 
using him even to answer the phone. He felt uncomfortable 
being on the inside of the Family councils as if he could be 
absolutely trusted with such secrets as murder. And now, 
going to see Kay, he felt guilty about her also. He had never 
been completely honest with her about his family. He had told 
her about them but always with little jokes and colourful anec- 
dotes that made them seem more like adventurers in a Techni- 
colour movie than what they really were. And now his fi&ther 
had been shot down in the street and his eldest brother was 
making plans for murder. That was putting it plainly and 
simply but that was never how he would tell it to Kzy, He had 
alrouly said his father being shot was more like an ^accident’ 
and that all the trouble was over. Hell, it looked like it was just 
beginning. Sonny and Tom were off-centre on this guy SoUoazo, 


121 



they were still underrating him, even though Sonny was 
smart enough to see the danger. Michael tried to think what 
the Turk might have up his sleeve. He was obviously a bold 
man, a clever man, a man of extraprdinary force. You had to 
figure him to come up with a real surprise. But then Sonny and 
Tom and Clemen 2 a and Tessio were all agreed that everything 
was under control and they all had more experience than he 
did. He was the ‘civilian' in this war, Michael thought wryly. 
And they'd have to give him a hell of a lot better medals than 
he’d got in World War 11 to make him join this one. 

Thinking this made him feel guilty about not feeling more 
sympathy for his father. His own father shot full of holes and 
yet in a curious way Michael, better than anyone else, under- 
stood when Tom had said it was just busiiless, not personal. 
That his father had paid for the power he had wielded all 
his life, the respect he had extorted from all those around 
him. 

What Michael wanted was out, out of all this, to lead his 
own life. But he couldn’t cut loose from the family until the crisis 
was over. He had to help in a civilian capacity. With sudden 
clarity he realized that he was annoyed with the role assigned 
to him, that of the privileged noncombatant, the excused con- 
scientious objector. That was why the word ‘civilian’ kept 
popping into his skull in such an irritating way. 

\^en he got to the hotel, Kay was waiting for him in the 
lobby. (A couple of Qemenza’s people had driven him into 
town and dropped him ofi on a nearby corner after making 
sure they were not followed.) 

They had dinner together and some drinks. ‘What time arc 
you going to visit your father?’ Kay asked. 

Michael looked at his watch. ‘Visiting hours end at eight- 
thirty. I think I'll go after everybody has left. They'll let me 
up. He has a private room and his own nurses so 1 can just sit 
with him for a while. I don’t think he can talk yet or even 
know if I’m there. But I have to show respect.’ 

Kay said quietly, ‘I feel so sorry for your father, he seemed 
like such a nice man at the wedding. I can’t believe the things 
the papers are printing about him. I’m sure most of it’s not 
true.’ 


122 



Michad said politely, don’t think so either.* He was sur- 
prised to find himself so secretive with Kay. He loved her, he 
trusted her, but he would never tell her anything about his 
father or the Family. She was an outsider. 

‘What about you?’ Kay asked. ‘Arc you going to get mixed 
up in this gang war the papers are talking about so gleefully?* 

Michael grinned, unbuttoned his jacket and held it wide 
open. ‘Look, no guns,’ he said. Kay laughed. 

It was getting late and they went up to their room. She 
mixed a drink for both of them and sat on his lap as they drank. 
Beneath her dress she was all silk until his hand touched the 
glowing skin of her thigh. They fell back on the bed together 
and made love with all their clothes on, their mouths glued 
together. When they were finished they lay very still, feeling 
the heat of their bodies burning through their garments. Kay 
murmured, ‘Is that what you soldiers call a quickie?’ 

‘Yeah,’ Michael said. 

‘It’s not bad,’ Kay said in a judicious voice. 

They do2ed off until Michael suddenly started up anxiously 
and looked at his watch. ‘Damn,’ he said. ‘It’s nearly ten. I 
have to get down to the hospital.’ He went to the bathroom to 
wash up and comb his hair. Kay came in after him and put her 
arms around his waist from behind. ‘When are we going to get 
married ? ’ she asked. 

‘Whenever you say,’ Michael said. ‘As soon as this family 
thing quiets down and my old man gets better. I think you’d 
better explain things to your parents though.’ 

‘What should I explain?’ Kay said quietly. 

Michael ran the comb through his hair. ‘Just say that you’ve 
met a brave, handsome guy of Italian descent. Top marks at 
Dartmouth. Distinguished Service Cross during the war plus 
the Purple Heart. Honest. Hard-working. But his father is a 
Mafia chief who has to kill bad people, sometimes bribe high 
government officials and in his line of work gets shot full of 
holes himself. But that has nothing to do with Iiis honest hard- 
working son. Do you think you can remember all that?’ 

Kay let go his body and leaned against the door of the 
bathroom. ‘Is he really?’ she said. ‘Does he really?’ She 
paused. ‘Kill people?’ 



Midbad fin&hed oombiag hb btit. *I doa*t really know/ he 
^id. ‘Nobcxly really knows. But 1 wouldo*i be surprised.’ 

Before he went out the door she asked, * When will I see you 
again?’ 

Michael kissed her. ‘1 want you to go home and think 
things over in that little hick town of yours,* he said. ‘I don’t 
want you to get mixed up in this business in any way. After the 
Qiristmas holidays I’U be back at school and we’ll get together 
up in Hanover. OK?’ 

‘OK,’ she said. She watched him go out the door, saw him 
wave before he stepped into the elevator. She had never felt so 
close to him, never so much in love and if someone had 
told her she would not see Michael again until two years 
|>assed, she would not have been able to bear the angui^ of 


When Michael got out of the c b ifi front of the French 
Hospital he was surprised to see that the street was completely 
deserted. When he entered the hospital he was even more sur- 
prised to find the lobby empty. Damn it, what the hell were 
Qemenza and Tessio doing? Sure, they never went to West 
Point but they knew enough about tacrics to have outposts. 
A couple of their men should have been in the lobby at 
least. 

Even die latest visitors had departed, it was almost ten- 
thirty at night. Michael was tense and alert now. He didn’t 
bother to stop at the mformation desk, he already knew his 
father’s room number up on the fourth floor. He took the self- 
s^icc elevator. Oddly enough nobody stopped him until he 
reached the nurses’ station on the fourth floor. But he strode 
right paist her query and on to his father’s room. There was no 
one outside the door. Where the hell were the two detectives 
who were supposed to be waiting around to guard and ques- 
tion the old man? Where the hell were Tessio and Qemenza’s 
people? Could there be someone inside the room? But die 
door was open. Michael went in. There was a figure in the bed 
and by the December moonlight straining through the 
window Michael could see his fiither’s face. Even now it was 
impassive, the chest heaved shallowly with his uneven breath. 


114 



IVibei faaog fitxm ffted gfdlowv betide ttie bed aod no 
oote. On the floor watt glass jarceoeiviQgtfaepoisotisemptM 
from his stomach by other tubes. Michael stayed diere for a 
few moments to make sure his father was all right, then backed 
out of the room. 

He told the nurse, ^My name is Michael Corleone, 1 just 
want to sit with my father. What ha{>pened to the detectives 
who were supposed to be guarding him?’ 

The nurse was a pretty young tfajng with a great deal of con- 
fidence in the power of her office. *Oh, your fisther just had too 
many visitors, it interfered with the hospital service,’ she said. 
* The police came and made them all leave about ten minutes 
ago. And then just five minutes ago 1 had to call the detectives 
to the phone for an emergency alarm from their headquarters, 
and then they left too. But don’t worry, 1 look in on your 
father often and 1 dm hear any sound from his room. That’s 
why we leave the doors open.* 

'Thank you,’ Michael said. '1*11 sit with him for a little 
while. OK?’ 

She smiled at him. 'Just for a little bit and then I’m aftaid 
you’ll have to leave. It’s the rules, you know.’ 

Michael went back into his father’s room. He took the 
phone from its cradle and got the hospital operator to give 
him the house in Long Beach, the phone in ffie comer office 
rcram. Sonny answered. Michael whispered, 'Sonny, I’m 
down at the hospital, 1 came down late. Sonny, there’s nobody 
here. None of Tessio’s people. No detectives at the door. The 
old tnan was completely unprotected.’ His voice was tremb- 
ling. 

There was a long silence and then Sonny’s voice c^e, low 
and impressed, 'Ibis is Solloazo’s move you were talking 
about.’ 

Michael said, ' That’s what 1 figured too. But how did he get 
the oops to cleu: everybody out and where did they go? W^ 
happened to Tessio’s men? Jesus Christ, has that bastard 
S 0 U 0220 got the New York Police Department in his pocket 
too?* 

'Take k easy, kid.’ Sonny’s voice was soodiing. 'We got 
hicky again wkh you going to visit the hospital so late. Stay in 



the old man’s room. Lock the door from the inside. PU have 
some men there inside of fifreen minutes, soon as 1 make some 
calls. Just sit tight and don’t panic. OK, kid?’ 

‘1 won’t panic,’ Michael said. For the first time since it had 
all started he felt a furious anger rising in him, a cold hatred 
for his father’s enemies. 

He hung up the phone and rang the buzzer for the nurse. He 
decided to use his own judgement and disregard Sonny’s 
orders. When the nurse came in he said, ‘I don’t want you to 
get frightened, but we have to move my father right away. To 
another room or another floor. Can you disconnect all these 
tubes so we can wheel the bed out?’ 

The nurse said, ‘That’s ridiculous. We have to get permis* 
sion from the doctor.’ 

Michael spoke very quickly. ‘You’ve read about my father 
in the papers. You’ve seen that there’s no one here tonight to 
guard him. Now Pve just got word some men will come 
into the hospital to kill him. Please believe me and help me.’ 
He could be extraordinarily persuasive when he wanted to 
be. 

The nurse said, ‘We don’t have to disconnect the tubes. We 
can wheel the stand with the bed.’ 

‘Do you have an empty room?’ Michael whispered. 

‘At the end of the haU,* the nurse said. 

It was done in a matter of moments, very quickly and very 
efficiently. Then Michael said to the nurse, ‘ Stay here with him 
until help comes. If you’re outside at your station you might 
get hurt.’ 

At that moment he heard his father’s voice from the bed, 
hoarse but full of strength, ‘Michael, is it you? What happened, 
what is It?’ 

Michael leaned over the bed. He took his father’s hand in 
his. ‘It’s Mike,’ he said. ‘Don’t be afraid. Now listen, don’t 
make any noise at all, especially if somebody calls out your 
name. Some people want to Idll you, understand? But I’m 
here so don’t be afraid.’ 

Don Corleone, still not fully conscious of what had hap- 
pened to him the day before, in terrible pain, yet smiled bene- 
volently on his youngest son, wanting to tell him, but it was 

126 



too much effort, ‘Why should I be afraid now? Strange men 
have come to kill me ever since I was twelve years old.* 


CHAPTER TEN 


The hospital was small and private with just one entrance. 
Michael looked through the window down into the street. 
There was a curved courtyard that had steps leading down 
into the street and the street was empty of cars. But whoever 
came into the hospital would have to come through that 
entrance. He knew he didn’t have much time so he ran out of 
the room and down the four flights and through the wide 
doors of the ground floor entrance. Off to the side he saw the 
ambulance yard and there was no car there, no ambulances 
cither. 

Michael stood on the sidewalk outside the hospital and lit a 
cigarette. He unbuttoned his coat and stood in light of a 
lamp-post so that his features could be seen. A young man was 
walking swiftly down from Ninth Avenue, a pacl^ge under 
his arm. The young man wore a combat jacket and had a heavy 
shock of black hair. His face was familiar when he came under 
the lamplight but Michael could not place it. But the young 
man stopped in front of him and put out his hand, saying in a 
heavy Italian accent, ‘Don Michael, do you remember me? 
Enzo, the baker’s helper to Nazorine the Paniterra; his son-in- 
law. Your father saved my life by getting the government to 
let me stay in America.* 

Michael shook his hand. He remembered him now. 

Enzo went on, ‘I’ve come to pay my respects to your father. 
Will they let me into the hospital so late?’ 

Michael smiled and shook his head. ‘No, but thanks any- 
way. I’ll tell the Don you came.’ A car came roaring down the 
street and Michael was instantly alert. He said to Enzo, ‘Leave 
here quickly. There may be trouble. You don’t want to get 
involved with the police.’ 

He saw the look of fear on the young Italian’s face. Trouble 



with the police might mean being deported or refusal of 
citizenship. But the young man stood hst. He whispered in 
Italian, ‘If there’s trouble I’ll stay to help. I owe it to the 
Godfather.’ 

Michael was touched. He was about to tell the young man 
to go away again, but then he thought, why not let him stay? 
Two men in front of the hospital might scare off any of Sol- 
lozzo’s crew sent to do a job. One man almost certainly 
would not. He gave Enzo a cigarette and lit it for him. They 
both stood under the lamp-post in the cold December night. 
The yellow panes of the hospital, bisected by the greens of 
Qiristmas decorations, twinkled down on them. They had 
almost finished their cigarettes when a long low black car 
turned into 30th Street from Ninth Avenue and cruised to- 
wards them, very close to the kerb. It almost stopped. Michael 
peered to see the faces inside, his body flinching involun- 
tarily. The car seemed about to stop, then speeded forward. 
Somebody had recognized him. Michael gave Enzo another 
cigarette and noticed that the baker’s hands were shaking. To 
his surprise his own hands were steady. 

They stayed in the street smoking for what was no more 
than ten minutes when suddenly the night air was split by a 
police siren. A patrol car made a screaming turn from Ninth 
Avenue and pulled up in front of the hospital. Two more 
squad cars followed right behind it. Suddenly the hospital 
entrance-way was flooded with uniformed police and de- 
tectives. Michael heaved a sigh of relief. Good old Sonny must 
have got through right away. He moved forward to meet 
them. 

Two huge, burly policemen grabbed his arms. Another 
frisked him. A massive police captain, gold braid on his cap, 
came up the steps, his men parting respectfully to leave a path. 
He was a vigorous man for his girth and despite the white hair 
that peeked out of his cap. His face was beefy red. He came up 
to Michael and said harshly, *I thought 1 got all you guinea 
hoods locked up. Who the hell are you and what are you doing 
here?’ 

One of the cops standing beside Michael 8aid» ‘He’s dean, 
Giptain.’ 


laS 



Michael didn’t answer. He was stadying this police captain, 
coldly searching his fiice, the metallic blue eyes. A detective in 
plain clothes said, ’That’s Michael Corleone, the Don’s son.’ 
Michael said quietly, ’What happened to the detectives who 
were supposed to be guarding my fiather? Who pulled them 
o£F that detail?’ 

The police captain was choleric with rage. ‘You fucking 
hood, who the hell are you to tell me my business? I pulled 
them off. 1 don’t give a shit how many dago gangsters kill each 
other. If it was up to me, I wouldn’t lift a finger to keep your 
old man from getting knocked off. Now get the hell out of 
here. Get out of this street, you punk, and stay out of this 
hospital when it’s not visiting hours.’ 

Michael was still studying him intently. He was not angry at 
what this police captain was saying. His mind was racing 
furiously. Was it possible that SoUozzo had been in that first 
car and had seen him standing in front of the hospital? Was it 
possible that SoUozzo had then called this captain and said, 
’How come the Corleones* men are still around the hospital 
when I paid you to lock them up?’ Was it possible that aU had 
been carefully plaimed as Sonny had said? Everything fitted in. 
Sdll cool, he said to the captain, ’I’m not leaving this hospital 
until you put guards around my father’s room.’ 

The captain didn’t bother answering. He said to the detec- 
tive standing beside him, ’Phil, lock this punk up.’ 

The detective said hesitantly, ’The kid is clean. Captain. 
He’s a war' hero and he’s never been mixed up in the rackets. 
The papers could make a sdnk.’ 

T^c captain started to turn on the detective, his face red 
with fiiry. He roared out, ’Goddamn it, I said lock him up.’ 

Michael, still thinking clearly, not angry, said with de- 
liberate malice, ’How much is the Turk paying you to set my 
father up. Captain?’ 

The police captain turned to him. He said to the two burly 
patrolmen, ’Hold him.’ Michael felt his arms pinned to his 
sides. He saw the captain’s massive fist arching towards his 
face. He tried to weave away but the fist caught him high on 
the cheekbone. A grenade exploded in his skull. His mouth 
fitter! with blood and small hard bones that he realized were his 


119 



teeth. He could feel the side of his head puff up as if it 
were filling with air. His legs were weighdess and he would 
have fidlen if the two policemen had not held him up. But 
he was still conscious. The plainclothes detective had stepped 
in front of him to keep the captain from hitting Um 
again and was saying, ‘Jesus Christ, Captain, you really hurt 
him.’ 

The captain said loudly, ‘I didn’t touch him. He attacked 
me and he fell. Do you understand that? He resisted arrest.’ 

Through a red haze Michael could see more cars pulling up 
to the kerb. Men were getting out. One of them he recognized 
as Clemenza’s lawyer, who was now speaking to the police 
captain, suavely and surely. ‘The Corleone Family has hired a 
firm of private detectives to guard Mr Corleone. These men 
with me are licensed to carry firearms. Captain. If you arrest 
them, you’ll have to appear before a judge in the morning and 
tell him why.* 

The lawyer glanced at Michael. ‘Do you want to prefer 
charges against whoever did this to you?’ he asked. 

Michael had trouble talking. His jaws wouldn’t come to- 
gether but he managed to mumble. *1 slipped,’ he said. *I 
slipped and fell.’ He saw the captain give him a triumphant 
glance and he tried to answer that glance with a smile. At all 
costs he wanted to hide the delicious icy chilliness that con- 
trolled his brain, the surge of wintry cold hatred that pervaded 
his body. He wanted to give no warning to anyone in this 
world as to how he felt at this moment. As the Don would not. 
Then he felt himself carried into the hospital and he lost con- 
sciousness. 

Wl^en he woke up in the morning he found that his jaw had 
been wired together and that four of his teeth along the left 
side of his mouth were missing. Hagen was sitting beside his 
bed. 

‘Did they drug me up?’ Michael asked. 

‘Yeah,’ Hagen said. ‘They had to dig some bone. fragments 
out of your gums and they figured it would be too painful. 
Besides you were practically out anyway.’ 

'Is there anything ebe wrong with me?’ Michael asked. 


130 



*No/ Hagen said. * Sonny wants you out at the Long Beach 
house. Think you can make it?’ 

‘Sure/ Michael said. ‘Is the Don all right?’ 

Hagen flushed. ‘I think weVe solved the problem now. We 
have a Arm of private detectives and we have the whole area 
loaded. 1*11 tell you mote when we get in the car.* 

Clemenza was driving, Michael and Hagen sat in the back. 
Michael’s head throbbed. ‘So what the hell really happened 
last night, did you guys ever And out ? ’ 

Hagen spoke quietly. ‘Sonny has an inside man, that 
Detective Phillips who tried to protect you. He gave us the 
scoop. The police captain, McQuskey, is a guy who’s been on 
the take very heavy ever since he’s been a patrolman. Our 
Family has paid him quite a bit. And he’s greedy and untrust- 
worthy to do business with. But Sollo 2 : 2 o must have paid him 
a big price. McQuskey had all Tessio’s men around and in the 
hospital arrested right after visiting hours. It didn’t help that 
some of them were carrying guns. Then McQuskey pulled the 
official guard detectives ofl the Don’s door. Claimed he needed 
them and that some other cops were supposed to go over and 
take their place but they got their assignments bollixed. 
Baloney. He was paid ofl to set the Don up. And Phillips said 
he’s the kind of guy who’ll try it again. SoUozzo must have 
given him a fortune for openers and promised him the moon 
to come.’ 

‘Was triy getting hurt in the papers?’ 

‘No,’ Hagen said. ‘We kept that quiet. Nobody wants that 
known. Not the cops. Not us.’ 

‘Good,’ Michael said. ‘Did that boy Enxo get away?’ 

‘Yeah,’ Hagen said. ‘He was smarter than you. When the 
cops came be disappeared. He claims he stuck with you while 
Sollozzo’s car went by. Is that true?* 

‘Yeah,’ Michael said. ‘He’s a good kid.’ 

‘He’ll be taken care of,’ Hagen said. ‘You feeling OK?’ His 
face was concerned. ‘You look lousy.’ 

‘I’m OK,’ Michael said. ‘What was that police captain’s 
name?’ 

‘McQuskey,^ Hagen said. ‘By the way, it might make you 
fed better to know that the Corleone Family Ansdly got up 



on the scoreboard. Bruno Tattaglia, four o*clock this morn- 
ing.’ 

Michael sat up. ‘ How come? T thought we were supposed to 
sit tight.’ 

Hagen shrugged. ‘After what happened at the hospital 
Sonny got hard. The button men are out all over New York 
and New Jersey. We made the list last night. Fm trying to hold 
Sonny in, Mike. Maybe you can talk to him. This whole 
business can still be settled without a major war.’ 

‘Fll talk to him,’ Michael said. ‘Is there a conference this 
morning?’ 

‘ Yeah,* Hagen said. ‘ S0II0220 finally got in touch and wants 
to sit down with us. A negotiator is arranging the details. 
That means we win. Sollo220 knows he’s lost and he wants to 
get out with his life.’ Hagen paused. ‘Maybe he thought we 
were soft, ready to be taken, because we didn’t strike back. 
Now with one of the Tattaglia sons dead he knows we mean 
business. He really took an awful gamble bucking the Don. 
By the way, we got the confirmation on Luca. They killed him 
the night before they shot your father. In Bruno’s nightclub. 
Imagine that?’ 

Michael said, ‘No wonder they caught him off guard.’ 

At the houses in Long Beach the entrance to the mall was 
blocked by a long black car parked across its mouth. Two men 
leaned against the hood of the car. The two houses on each 
side, Michael noticed, had opened windows on their upper 
floors. Christ, Sonny must really mean business. 

Clemen2a parked the car outside the mall and they walked 
inside it. The two guards were Clemen2a’s men and he gave 
them a frown of greeting that served aj a salute. The men 
nodded their heads in acknowledgement. There were no 
smiles, no greetings. Clemcnza led Hagen and Michael 
Corleone into the house. 

Tine door was opened by another guard before they rang. 
He had obviously been watching from a window. They went 
to the corner office and found Sonny and Tessip waiting for 
them. Sonny came to Michael, took his younger brother’s head 
in his hands and said kiddingly, ‘Beautiful. Beautiful.* Michael 



knocked bis hands away, and went to the desk and poured 
himself some Scotch, hoping it would dull the ache in his 
wired }aw. 

The five of them sat around the room but the atmosphere 
was different than their earlier meetings. Sonny was gayer, 
more cheerful, and Michael realized w^t that gaiety meant. 
There were no longer any doubts in his older brother’s mind. 
He was committed and nothing would sway him. The attempt 
by Sollo^o the night before was the fiiml straw. There could 
no longer be any question of a truce. 

‘We got a call from the negotiator while you were gone,’ 
Sonny said to Hagen. ‘ The Turk wants a meeting now.’ Sonny 
laughed. ‘ The balls on that son of a bitch,* he said admiringly. 
‘After he craps out last night he wants a meeting today or the 
next day. Meanwhile we’re supposed just to lay back and take 
everything he dishes out. What fucking nerve.’ 

Tom asked cautiously, ‘ What did you answer ? ’ 

Sonny grinned. ‘I said sure, why not? Any time he says, J’m 
in no hurry. I’ve got a hundred button men out on the street 
twenty-four hours a day. If Sollozzo shows one hair on his 
asshole he’s dead. Let them take all the time they want.’ 

Hagen said, ‘Was there a definite proposal?’ 

‘Yeah,’ Sonny said. ‘He wants vis to send Mike to meet him 
to hear his proposition. The negotiator guarantees Mike’s 
safety. Sollozzo doesn’t ask us to guarantee his safety, he 
knows he can’t ask that. No point. So the meeting will be 
arranged on his side. His people will pick Mike up and take 
Mike to the meeting place. Mike will listen to Sollozzo and 
then they’ll turn him loose. But the meeting place is secret. The 
promise is the deal will be so good we can’t turn it down.’ 

Hagen asked, ‘ What about the Tattaglias ? What will they do 
about Bruno?’ 

‘That’s part of the deal. The negotiator says the Tattaglia 
Family has agreed to go along with Sollozzo. They’ll forget 
about Bruno Tattaglia. He pays for what they did to my 
father. One cancels out the other.’ Sonny laughed again. ‘The 
nervy bastards.’ 

Hagen said cautiously, ‘We should hear what they have to 
say.* 


X35 



Sonny shook his head from side to side. 'No, no, Consiglwri^ 
not this time.’ His voice held a faint trace of Italian accent. He 
was consciously mocking his father just to kid around. 'No 
more meetings. No more discussions. No more Sollo22o tricks. 
When the negotiator gets in touch with us again for our 
answer I want you to give him one message. I want Sollozzo. 
If not, it’s all-out war. We’ll go to the mattresses and we’ll put 
all the button men out on the street. Business will just have to 
suffer.’ 

‘ The other Families won’t stand for an all-out war,’ Hagen 
said. ‘It puts too much heat on everybody.* 

Sonny shrugged. ‘They have a simple solution. Give me 
Sollozzo. Or fight the Corleone Family.* Sonny paused, then 
said roughly, ‘No more advice on how to patch it up, Tom. 
The decision is made. Your job is to help me win. Under- 
stand ? ’ 

Hagen bowed his head. He was deep in thought for a 
moment. Then he said, ‘I spoke to your contact in the poUce 
station. He says that Captain McQuskey is definitely on Sol- 
lozzo’s payroll and for big money. Not only that, but 
McCluskey is going to get a piece of the drug operation. 
McCluskey has agreed to be Sollozzo’s bodyguard. The Turk 
doesn’t poke his nose out of his hole without McQuskey. 
When he meets Mike for the conference, McCluskey will be 
sitting beside him. In civilian clothes but carrying his gun. 
Now what you have to understand. Sonny, is that while Sol- 
lozzo is guarded like this, he’s invulnerable. Nobody has ever 
gunned down a New York police captain and got away 
with it. The heat in this town would be unbearable what with 
the newspapers, the whole police department, the churches, 
everything. That would be disastrous. The Families would be 
after you. The Corleone Family would become outcasts. Even 
the old man’s political protection would run for cover. So take 
that into consideration.’ 

Sonny shrugged. ‘McQuskey can’t stay with the Turk for 
ever. We’ll wait.’ 

Tessio and Qemenza were puffing on their cigars uneasily, 
not daring to speak, but sweating. It would be their skins that 
would go on the line if the wrong decision was made. 


134 



' Michael spoke for the first time. He asked Hagen, *Can the 
old man be moved out of the hospital on to the mall here?* 
Hagen shook his head. ‘That’s the first thing I asked. Im- 
possible. He’s in very bad shape. He’ll pull through but he 
needs all kinds of attention, maybe some more surgery. Im- 
possible.’ 

‘Then you have to get SoUozzo right away,’ Michael said. 
‘We can’t wait. The guy is too dangerous. He’ll come up with 
some new idea. Remember, the key is still that he gets rid of 
the old man. He knows that. OK, he knows that now it’s very 
tough so he’s willing to take defeat for his Ufe. But if he’s 
going to get killed anyway, he’ll have another crack at the 
Don. ^nd with that police captain helping him who knows 
what the hell might happen. We can’t take that chance. We 
have to get S0II0220 right away.* 

Sonny was scratching his chin thoughtfully. ‘You’re right, 
kid,’ he said. ‘You got right to the old nuts. We can’t let 
SoUozzo get another crack at the old man.’ 

Hagen said quietly, ‘What about Captain McCluskey?’* 
Sonny turned to Michael with an odd little smile. ‘Yeah, 
kid, what about that tough police captain?’ 

Michael said slowly, ‘OK, it’s an eictreme. But there are 
times when the most extreme measures are justified. Let’s 
think now that we have to kill McCluskey. The way to do it 
would be to have him heavily implicated so that it’s not an 
honest police captain doing his duty but a crooked police 
ofiBcial mixed up in the rackets who got what was coming to 
him, like any crook. We have newspaper people on our pay- 
roU we can give that story to with enough proof so that they 
can back it up. That should take some of the heat off. How 
does that sound?’ Michael looked around defereadaUy to the 
others. Tessio and Oemenza had gloomy faces and reused to 
speak. Sonny said with the same odd smile, ‘Go on, kid, 
you’re doing great. Out of the mouths of infants, as the Don 
always used to say. Go ahead, Mike, teU us more.* 

Hagen was smiling too a little and averting his head. 
Mich^ flushed. ‘WeU, they want me to go to a conference 
with SoUozzo. It wiU be me, SoUozzo and McQuskey aU on 
our own. Set up the meeting for two days from now, ^en get 



our informers to find out where the meeting will be held. 
Insist that it has to be a public place, that I’m not going to let 
them take me into any apartments or houses. Let it be a 
restaurant or a bar at the height of the dinnet hour, something 
like that, so that I’ll feel safe. They’ll feel safe too. Even Sol- 
lozzo won’t figure that we’ll dare to gun the captain. They’ll 
frisk me when 1 meet them so I’ll have to be clean then, but 
figure out a way you can get a weapon to me while I’m meet- 
ing them. Then I’ll take both of them.’ 

All fouz heads turned and stared at him. Clemenza and 
Tcssio were gravely astonished. Hagen looked a little sad but 
not surprised. He started to speak and thought better of it. But 
Sonny, his heavy Cupid’s face twitching with mirth, suddenly 
broke out in loud roars of laughter. It was deep belly laughter, 
not faking. He was really breaking up. He pointed a finger at 
Michael, trying to speak through gasps of mirth. ‘You, the 
high-class college kid, you never wanted to get mixed up in 
the Family business. Now you wanta kill a police captain and 
the Turk just because you got your face smashed by Mc- 
Cluskey. You’re taking it personal, it’s just business and you’re 
taking it personal. You wanta kill these two guys just because 
you got slapped in the face. It was all a lot of crap. All these 
years it was just a lot of crap.’ 

Clemenza and Tessio, completely misunderstanding, think- 
ing that Sonny was laughing at his young brother’s bravado 
for making such an ofier, were also smiling broadly and a little 
patronizingly at Michael. Only Hagen warily kept his face 
impassive. 

Michael looked around at all of them, then stared at Sonny, 
who still couldn’t stop laughing. ‘ You*// take both of them?’ 
Sonny said. ‘Hey, kid, they won’t give you medals, they put 
you in the electric chair. You know that? This is no hero 
business, kid, you don’t shoot people from a mile away. You 
shoot when you see the whites of their eyes like we got taught 
in school, remember? You gotta stand right next to them and 
blow their heads o£F and their brains get all over your nice 
Ivy League suit. How about that, kid, you wanta do that just 
because some dumb cop slapped you around?’ He was still 
laughing. 

156 



Michael stood up. * Yoa*d better stop laughing/ he said. The 
change in him was so extraordinary that the smiles vanished 
ftom the hccB of Qemenxa and Tessio. Michael was not tall or 
heavily built but his presence seemed to radiate danger. In that 
moment he was a reincarnation of Don Corleone himself. His 
eyes had gone a pale tan amd his face was bleached of colour. 
He seemed at any moment about to fling himself on his older 
and stronger brother. There was no doubt that if he had had a 
weapon in his hands Sonny would have been in danger. Sonny 
stopped laughing, and Michael said to him in a cold deadly 
voice, ‘Dbn’t you think I can do it, you son of a bitch?' 

Sonny had got over his laughing fit. ‘I know you can do it,' 
he said. ‘I wasn’t laughing at what you said. I was just laugh- 
ing at how funny things turn out. I always said you were the 
toughest one in the Family, tougher th^ the Don himself. 
You were the only one who could stand off the old man. 1 
remember you when you were a kid. What a temper you had 
then. Hell, you even used to fight me and I was a lot older 
than you. And Freddie had to beat ,the shit out of you at least 
once a week. And now Sollozzo has you figured for the soft 
touch in the Family because you let McQuskey hit you without 
fighting back and you wouldn’t get mixed up in the Family 
fights. He figures he got nothing to worry al^ut if he meets 
you head to head. And McCluskey too, he’s got you figured 
for a yellow guinea.’ Sonny paused and then said softly, 'But 
you’re a Corleone after all, you son of a bitch. Aind 1 was the 
only one who knew it. I’ve been sitting here waiting for the 
last three days, ever since the old man got shot, waiting for 
you to crack out of that Ivy League, war hero bullshit character 
you’ve been wearing. I’ve been waiting for you to become my 
right arm so we can kill those fucks that are trying to destroy 
our father and our Family. And all it took was a sock on the 
jaw. How do you like that?' Sonny made a comical gesture, a 
punch, and repeated, 'How do you like that?’ 

The tension had relaxed in the room. Mike shook his head. 
'Sonny, I’fn doing it because it’s the only thing to do. I can’t 
give Siollozzo another crack at the old man. 1 seem to be the 
only one who can get close enough to him. And I figured it 
out. I don't think you can get anybody else to knock oS a 


*57 



police captain. Maybe you would do it» Sonny, but you have a 
wife and kids and you have to run the Family business until 
the old man is in shape. So that leaves me and Freddie. Freddie 
is in shock and out of action. Finally that leaves just me. It’s all 
logic. The sock on the jaw had nothing to do with it.* 

Sonny came over and embraced him. ‘ I don’t give a damn 
what your reasons are, just so long as you’re with us now. And 
m tell you another thing, you’re right all the way, Tom, 
what’s your say?* 

Hagen shrugged. 'The reasoning is solid. What makes it so 
is that I don’t think the Turk is sincere about a deal. I think 
he’ll still try tq get at the Don. Anyway on his past perfor- 
mance that’s how we have to figure him. So we try to get 
Sollozzo. We get him even if we have to get the police captain. 
But whoever does the job is going to get an awful lot of heat. 
Does it have to be Mike?’ 

Sonny said softly, ‘ I could do it.* 

Hagen shook his head impatiently. ‘SoHozzo wouldn’t let 
you get within a mile of him if he had ten police captains. And 
besides you’re the acting head of the Family. You can’t be 
risked.’ Hagen paused and said to Clcmenza and Tessio, 'Do 
either one of you have a top button man, someone really 
spexial, who would take on this job? He wouldn’t have to 
worry about money for the rest of his life.’ 

Qemenza spoke first. 'Nobody that Sollozzo wouldn’t 
know, he’d catch on right away. He’d catch on if me or Tessio 
went too.* 

Hagen said, 'What about somebody really tough who hasn’t 
made his rep yet, a good rookie?’ 

Both caporegtmes shook their heads. Tessio smiled to take the 
sting out of liis words and said, 'Hiat’s like bringing a guy up 
from the minors to pitch the World Scries.’ 

Sonny broke in curtly, 'It has to be Mike. For a million 
different reasons. Most important they got him down as faggy. 
And he can do the job, I guarantee that, and that’s important 
because this is the only shot we’ll get at that sneaky bastard 
Turk. So now we have to figure out the best way to back him 
up. Tom, Qemenza, Tessio, find out where Sollozzo will take 
him for the conference, I don’t care how much it costs. When 

138 



we find that out we can figute out how we can get a weapon 
into hia hands. Qemenaa, I want you to get him a really safe*’ 
gun out of your collection, the ** coldest” one you got. Im- 
possible to trace. Try to make it short barrel with a lot of blast- 
ing power. It doesn’t have to be accurate. He’ll be right on top 
of them when he uses it. Mike, as soon as you’ve used the gun, 
drop it on the floor. Don’t be caught with it on you. Qemenza^ 
tape the barrel and the trigger with that special stuil you got so 
he won’t leave prints. Remember, Mike, we can square every- 
thing, witnesses, and so forth, but if they catch you with the 
gun on you we can’t square that. We’ll have transportation and 
protection and then we’ll make you disappear for a nice long 
vacation until the heat wears oflT. You’ll be gone a long time, 
Mike, but 1 don’t want you saying goodbye to your girlfriend 
or even calling her. After it’s all over and you’re out of the 
country I’ll send her word that you’re OK. Those are orders/ 
Sonny smiled at his brother. ‘Now stick with Qemenaa and 
get used to handling the gun he picks out for you. Maybe even 
practise a little. We’ll take care of everything else. Everything. 
OK, kid?’ 

Again Michael Corleone felt that delicious refreshing chil- 
liness all over his body. He said to his brother, ‘You didn’t 
have to give me that crap about not talking to my girlfrieod 
about something like this. What the hell did you think 1 was 
going to do, call her up to say goodbye?’ 

Sonny said hastily, ‘OK, but you’re still a rookie so I spell 
things out. Forget it.’ 

Michael said with a grin, ‘What the hell do you mean, a 
rookie? I listened to the old man just as hard as you did. How 
do you think I got so smart?’ They both laughed. 

Hagen poured drinks for everyone. He looked a little glum. 
The statesman forced to go to war, the lawyer forced to go to 
law. ‘ Well, anyway now we know what we’re going to do,’ he 
said. 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 


Captain Mark McCluskey sat in his office fingering three 
envelopes bulging with betting slips^ He was frowning and 
wishing he could decode the notations on the slips. It was very 
important that he do so. The envelopes were the betting slips 
that his raiding parties had picked up when they had hit one of 
the Corleone Family bookmakers the night before. Now the 
bookmaker would have to buy back the slips so that players 
couldn’t claim winners and wipe him out. 

It was very important for Captain McCluskey to decode the 
slips because he didn’t want to get cheated when he sold the 
slips back to the bookmaker. If there was fifty grand worth of 
action, then maybe h^ could sell it back for five grand. But if 
there were a lot of iieavy bets and the slips represented a 
hundred grand or maybe even two hundred grand, then the 
price should be considerably higher. McCluskey fiddled with 
the envelopes and then decided to let the bookie sweat a little 
bit and make the first offer. That might tip ofi what the real 
price should be. 

McCluskey looked at the station house clock on the wall of 
his office. It was time for him to pick up that greasy Turk, 
SoUozzo, and take him to wherever he was going to meet the 
Corleone Family. McCluskey went over to his wall locker and 
started to change into his civilian clothes. When be was 
finished he called his wife and told her he would not be home 
for sapper that night, that he would be out on the job. He 
never confided in his wife on anything. She thought they lived 
the way they did on his policeman’s salary. McCluskey grunted 
with amusement. His mother had thought the same thing but 
he had learned early, flis father had shown him the ropes. 

His father had been a police sergeant, and every week father 
and son had walked though the precinct and McQuskey 
Senior had introduced his six-year-old son to the storekeepers, 
saying, ‘And this is my little boy.* 

The storekeepers would shake his hand and compliment 

140 



him extravagantly and dng open their cash registers to give the 
little boy a gift of five or ten dollars. At the end of the day, 
little Mark McCuskey would have all the pockets of his suit 
stuffed with paper money, would feel so proud that his fiither*s 
friends liked him well enough to give him a present every 
month they saw him. Of course his father put the money in the 
bank for him, for his college education, and little Mark got at 
most a fifty-ccnt piece for himself. 

Then when Mark got home and his policemen uncles asked 
him what he wanted to be when he grew up and he would lisp 
childishly, ‘A policeman,* they would all laugh uproariously. 
And of course later on, though his father wanted him to go to 
college first, he went right from high school to studying for 
the police force. 

He had been a good cop, a brave cop. The tough young 
punks terrorizing street corners fled ^hen he approached and 
finally vanished from his beat altog ^ther. He was a very tough 
cop and a very fair one. He never took his son around to ^e 
storekeepers to collect his money presents for ignoring gar- 
bage violations and parking violations; he took the money 
directly into his own hand, direct because he felt he earned it. 
He never ducked into a movie house or goofed off into res- 
taurants when he was on foot patrol as some of the other cops 
did, especially on winter nights^ He always made his rounds. 
He gave his stores a lot of protection, a lot of service. When 
winos and drunks filtered up from the Bowery to panhandle 
on his beat he got rid of them so roughly that they never came 
back. The tradespeople in his precinct appreciated it. And they 
showed their appreciation. 

He also obeyed the system. The bookies in ^ his prednet 
knew he would never make trouble to get an extra payoff for 
himself, that he was content for his share of the station house 
bag. His name was on the li^t with the others and he never 
tried to make extras. He was a fair cop who took only clean 
graft and his rise in the police department was steady if not 
spectacular. 

During this time he was raising a large family of four sons, 
none of whom became policemen. They all w6nt to Fordham 
University and since by that time Mark McOuskey was rising 


141 



from sergeant to lieutenant and finally to captain, they lacked 
for nothing. It was at this time that McQuskey got the reputa- 
tion for being a hard bargainer. The bookmakers in his district 
paid more protection money than the bookmakers in any other 
part of the city, but maybe that was because of the expense of 
putting four boys through coUege. 

McQuskey himself felt there was nothing wrong with clean 
graft. Why the hell should his kids go to CCNY oi a cheap 
Southern college just because the Police Department didn’t 
pay its people enough money to live on and take care of their 
families properly with? He protected all these people with his 
life and his record showed his dtations for gun duels with 
stick-up men on his beat, strong-arm protection guys, would- 
b^ pimps. He had hammered them into the ground. He had 
jtept his little corner of the city safe for ordinary people and he 
sure as hell was entided to more than his lousy one C note a 
week. But he wasn’t indignant about his low pay, he under- 
stood that everybody had to take care of themselves. 

Bruno Tattaglia was an old friend of his. Bruno had gone to 
Fordham with one of his sons and then Bruno had opened his 
nightclub and whenever the McQuskey family spent an in- 
frequent night on the town, they could enjoy the cabaret with 
liquor and dinner - on the house. On New Year’s Eve they 
received engraved invitations to be guests of the management 
and always received one of the best tables. Bruno always nuide 
sure they were introduced to the celebrities who performed in 
his club, some of them famous singers and Holl3rwood stars. 
Of course sometimes he asked a little favour, like getting an 
employee with a record cleared for a cabaret work licence, 
usuaUy a pretty girl with a police dossier as a hustler or roller. 
McQuskey would be glad to oblige. 

McQuskey made it a policy never to show that he under- 
stood what other people were up to. When Sollozzo had 
approached him with the proposition to leave old man Cor^ 
leone uncovered in the hospital, McQuskey didn’t ask why. 
He asked price. When Sollozzo said ten grand, McQuskey 
knew why. He did not hesitate. Q>rleone was one of the 
biggest b^fia men in the country with more political connex- 
ions than Gqxme had ever had. Whoever knocked him ofi 



would be doing the country a big favour. McCluskey took the 
money in advance and did the job. When he received a call 
from Sollozzo that there were still two of Corleone’s men in 
front of the hospital he had flown into a rage. He had locked 
up all of Tessio *8 men, he had pulled the detective guards off 
the door of Coileone’s hospital room. And now, being a man 
of principle, he would have to give back the ten grand, money 
be had already earmarked to insure the education of his grand* 
children. It was in that rage that he had gone to the hospital 
and struck Michael Corleone. 

But it had all worked out for the best. He had met with 
S0II0220 in the Tattaglia nightclub and they had made an even 
better deal. Again McCluskey didn’t ask questions, since he 
knew all the answers. He just made sure of his ptice. It never 
occurred to him that he himself could be in any danger. That 
anyone would consider even for a moment killing a New York 
Qty police captain was too fantastic. The toughest hood in the 
MadBa had to stand still if the lowliest patrolman decided to 
slap him arotind. There was absolutely no percentage in 
killing cops. Because then all of a sudden a lot of hoods were 
killed resisting arrest or escaping the scene of a crime, and who 
the hell was going to do anything about that ? 

McQuskey sighed and got ready to leave the station bouse. 
Problems, always problems. His wife’s sister in Ireland bad 
just died after many years of fighting cancer and that cancer 
had cost him a pretty penny. Now the funeral would cost him 
more. His own uncles and aunts in the old country needed a 
little help now and then to keep their potato farms and he sent 
the money to do the trick. He didn’t begrudge it. And when he 
and his wife visited the old country they were treated like a 
king and queen. Maybe they would go again this summer now 
that the war was over and with all this extra money coming in. 
McQuskey told his patrolman clerk where he would be if he 
was needed. He did not feel it necessary to take any precautions. 
He could always claim Sollozzo was an informer he was meeting. 
Outside the station house he walked a few blocks and then 
caught a cab to the house where he would meet with Sollozzo. 

It was Tom Hagen who had to make all the arrangements 



for Michael’s leaving the country, his fidse passport, his sea- 
man’s card, his berth on an Italian freighter that would dock 
in a Sicilian port. Emissaries were sent that very day by plane 
to Sicily to prepare a hiding place with the Ma& chief in the 
hill country. 

Sonny arranged for a car and an absolutely trustworthy 
driver to be waiting for Michael when he stepped out of the 
restaurant where the meeting would be held with Sollozzo. 
The driver would be Tessio himself, who had volunteered for 
the job. It would be a beat-up-looking, cat but with a fine 
motor. It would have phony licence plates and the car itself 
would be untraceable. It had been saved for a special job 
requiring the best. 

Michael spent the day with Qemenza, practising with the 
small gun ti^ would be got to him. It was a .22 filled with 
soft-nosed bullets that made pinpricks going in and left in- 
sulting gaping holes when they exited from the human body. 
He found that it was accurate up to five of his steps away from 
a target. After that the bullets might go anywhere. The trigger 
was tight but Qememi^ worked on this with some tools so 
that it pulled easier. They decided to leave it noisy. They 
didn’t want an innocent bystander misunderstanding the situ- 
ation and interfering out of ignorant courage. The report of 
the gun would keep them away from Michael. 

Clemenza kept instructing him during the training session. 
‘Drop the gun as soon as you’ve finished using it. Just let your 
hand drop to your side and the gun slip out. Nobody will 
notice. Everybody will think you’re still armed. They’ll be 
staring at your free. Walk out of the place very quickly but 
don’): run. Don’t look anybody directly in the eye but don’t 
look away from them either. Remember, they’ll be scared of 
you, believe me, they’ll be scared of you. Nobody will inter- 
fere. As soon as you’re outside Tessio will be in the car waiting 
for you. Get in and leave the rest to him. Don’t be worried 
about accidents. You’d be surprised how well these afEairs go. 
Now put this hat on and let’s see how you look.’ He clapped a 
grey fedora on Michael’s head. Michael, who never wore a hat; 
grimaced; Qemenaa reassured him. *It helps against identifi- 
cation, just in case. Mostly it gives witnesses an excuse to 


144 



change thek identificatioii when we make them see the light. 
Remember, Mike, don’t worry about prints. The butt and 
trigger are fixed with special tape. Don’t touch any other part 
of the gun, remember that.’ 

Michael said, ‘Has Sonny found out where SoUozzo is 
taking me?’ 

Gemenza shrugged. ‘Not yet. Sollozzo is being very careful. 
But don’t worry about him harming you. The negotiator stays 
in our hands until you come back safe. If anything happens to 
you, the negotiator pays.’ 

‘Why the hell should he stick his neck out?’ Michael asked. 

‘He gets a big fee,’ Gemenza said. ‘A small fortune. Also he 
is an important man in the Families. He knows Sollozzo can’t 
let anything happen to him. Your life Is not worth the nego- 
tiator’s life to Sollozzo. Very simple. You’ll be safe all right. 
We’re the ones who catch hell afterwards.’ 

‘How bad will it be?’ Michael asked. 

‘Very bad,’ Gemenza said. ‘It means an all-out war with the 
TattagUa Family against the Corleone Family. Most of the 
others will line up with the Tattaglias. The Sanitation De^MUt- 
ment will be sweeping up a lot of dead bodies this winter.’ He 
ihrugged. ‘These things have to happen once every ten years 
or so. It gets rid of the bad blood. And then if we let them push 
os around on the little things they wanta take over everyt^g. 
You gotta stop them at the beginning. Like th^ shoulda 
stopped Hitler at Munich, they should never let him get away 
widi that, they were just asking for big trouble when they 1^ 
him get away with that.’ 

Michael had heard his finther say this same thing before, only 
in 1939 before the war actually started. If the J^amilies had 
been running the State Department there would never have 
been World War II, he thought with a grin. 

They drove back to the m^ and to the Don’s house, where 
Sonny still made his headquarters. Michael wondered how 
long Sonny could stay cooped up in the safe territory of the 
mall. Eventually, he would have to venture out. They found 
Sonny taking a nap on the couch. On the cofiee table were the 
remains of his late lunch, scraps of steak and breadcrumbs and 
a half-empty bottle of whisky. 


*45 



His father’s usuaUy neat office was taking on the look of a 
badly kept furnished room. Michael shook his brother awake 
and saidy * Why don’t you stop living like a bum and get this 
place cleaned up.’ 

Sonny yawned. *What the hell are you, inspecting the 
barracks? Mike, we haven’t got the word yet where they plan 
to take you, those bastards SoUozao and McQuskey. If we 
don’t find that out, how the hell are we going to get the gun to 
you?’ 

*Can’t I carry it on me?’ Michael asked. ‘Maybe they won’t 
frisk me and even if they do maybe they’ll miss it if we’re 
smart enough. And even if they find it - so what. They’ll just 
take it off me and no harm done.* 

Sonny shook his head. ‘Nah,’ he said. ‘We have to make this 
a sure hit on that bastard SoUoszo. Remember, get him Rrst if 
you possibly can. McQuskey is slower and dumber. You 
should have plenty of time to take him. Did Qemenza tell you 
to be sure to drop the gun?’ 

‘A million times,’ Michael said. 

Sonny got up from the sofa and stretched. ‘How does your 
jaw feel, kid?’ 

‘Lousy,’ Michael said. The left side of his face ached except 
those parts that felt numb because of the drugged wire holding 
it together. He took the bottle of whisky from the tabic and 
swigged directly from it. The pain eased. 

Sonny said, ‘ Easy, Mike, now is no time to get slowed up by 
booze.’ 

Michael said, *Oh, Qirist, Sonny, stop playing the big 
brother. I’ve been in combat against tougher guys than Sob 
lozzo and under worse conditions. Where the hell ate his 
mortars? Has he got air cover? Heavy artillery? Land mines? 
He’s just a wise son of a bitch with a big-wheel cop sidekick. 
Once anybody makes up their mind to kill them there’s no 
other problem. That’s the hard part, making up your mind. 
Thcy’U never know what hit them.’ 

Tom Hagen came into the room. He greeted them with a 
nod and went directly to the falsely-listed telephone. He called 
a few times and then shook his head at Sonny. ‘Not a whisper,’ 
he said. ‘Sollozzo is keeping it to himself as long as he can.’ 

146 



The phone rang. Sonny antweted it and he held up a hand 
as if to signal for quiet though no one had spoken. He jotted 
some notes down on a pad» tl^ said, ‘OK, he’ll be there,’ and 
hung up the phone. 

Sonny was laughing. ‘That son of a bitch Sollozzo, he really 
is something. Here’s the deal. At eight tonight he and Captain 
McQuskey pick up Mike in front of Jack Dempsey’s bar on 
Broadway. They go some place to talk, and get this. Mike and 
SoUozzo talk in Italian so that the Irish cop don’t know what 
the hell they are talking about. He even tells me, don’t worry, 
he knows McQuskey doesn’t know one word in Italian unless 
it’s ** soldi** and he’s checked you out, Mike, and knows you 
can understand Sicilian dialect.’ 

Michael said dryly, ‘I’m pretty rusty but we won’t talk 
long.* 

Tom Hagen said, ‘We don’t let Mike go until we have the 
negotiator. Is that arranged?* 

Qemenza nodded. ‘ The negotiator is at my house playing 
pinochle with three of my men. They wait for a call from me 
before they let him go.’ 

Sonny sank back in the leather armchair. ‘Now how the hell 
do we ^d out the meeting place? Tom, we’ve got informers 
with the Tattaglia Family, how come they haven’t given us the 
word?’ 

Hagen shrugged. ‘Sollozzo is really damn smart. He’s play- 
ing this close to the vest, so close that he’s not using any men 
as a cover. He figures the captain will be enough and that 
security is more important than guns. He’s right too. We’ll 
have to put a tail on Mike and hope for the best.’ 

Sonny shook his head. ‘Nah, anybody can lose a tail when 
they really want to. 'iTiat’s the first thing they’ll check out.’ 

By this time it was five in the afternoon. Sonny, with a 
worried look on his face, said, ‘Maybe we should just let Mike 
blast whoever is in the car when it tries to pick him up.’ 

Hagen shook his head. ‘What if SoUozzo is not m the car? 
We’ve tipped our hand for nothing. Damn it, we have to find 
out where SoUozzo is taking him.’ 

Qcmenza put in, ‘Maybe we should start trying to figure 
why he’s making it such a big secret’ 


*47 



Michad said impatiently, 'Because it*s the percentage. Why 
should he let us know anything if he can prevent it? Besides, 
he smells danger. He must be leery as hell even with that police 
captain for his shadow.’ 

Hagen snapped his fingers. 'That detective, that guy 
Phillips. Why don’t you give him a ring. Sonny? Maybe he 
can find out where the hell the captain can be reached. It’s 
worth a try. McCluskey won’t give a damn who knows where 
he’s going.’ 

Sonny picked up the phone and dialled a number. He spoke 
softly into the phone, then himg up. ‘He’ll call us back,’ 
Sonny said. 

They waited for nearly another thirty minutes and then the 
phone rang. It was Phillips. Sonny jotted something down on 
his pad and then hung up. His face was taut. ‘I think we’ve got 
it,’ he said. 'Giptain McCluskey always has to leave word on 
where he can be reached. From eight to ten tonight he’ll be at 
the Luna Azure up in the Bronx. Anybody know it?’ 

Tessio spoke confidently. 'I do. It’s perfect for us. A small 
family place with big booths where people can talk in private. 
Good food. Everybody minds their own business. Perfect.’ 
He leaned over Sonny’s desk and arranged stubbed*out 
cigarettes into map figures. ‘This is the entrance. Mike, when 
you finish just walk out and turn left, then turn the corner. I’ll 
spot you and put on my headlights and catch you on the fly. If 
you ^ve any trouble, yell and I’ll try to come in and get you 
out. Gemenza, you gotta work fast. Send somebody up there 
to plant the gun. They got an old-fashioned toilet with a space 
between the water container and the wall. Have your man 
tape the gun behind there. Mike, after they frisk you in the car 
and find you’re clean, they won’t be too worried about you. In 
the restaurant, wait a bit before you excuse yourself. No, 
better still, ask permission to go. Act a little in trouble first, 
very natural. They can’t figure anything. But when you come 
out again, don’t waste any time. Don’t sit down again at the 
table, start blasting. And don’t take chances. In the head, two 
shots apiece, and out as fast aft your legs can travel.’ 

Sonny had been listening judiciously. ‘I want somebody 
very good, very safe, to plant that gun,’ he told Gemenza. ‘I 

X48 



don’t wuit my bfothor coming out of tibat toikt wUi }u8t fab 
dick in hb hand.’ 

Qemenza said emphaticaUy, ^The gun will be tibete.’ 

^OK,’ Sonny said. ‘Everybody get rolling.’ 

Tessio and Clemenm left. Tom Hagen said, ‘ Sonny, should 
1 drive Mike down to New York?’ 

‘No,’ Sonny said. ‘I want you here. When Mike finishes, 
then our work begins and I’ll need you. Have you got those 
newspaper guys lined up?’ 

Hagen nodded. ‘ I’ll be feeding them info as soon as things 
break.’ 

Sonny got up and came to stand in front of Michael. He 
shook his hand. ‘OK, kid,’ he said, ‘you’re on. I’ll square it 
with Mom your not seeing her before you left. And I’ll get a 
message to your girlfriend when 1 think the time u right 
OK?’ 

‘OK,* Mike said. ‘How long do you think before 1 can 
comeback?’ 

‘At least a year,’ Sonny said. 

Tom Hagen put in, 'The Don might be able to work &8ter 
than that, Mike, but don’t count on it. The time element 
hinges on a lot of factors. How well we can plant stories with 
efae newsmen. How much the Police Department wants to 
cover up. How violently the other Families react. There’s 
going to be a hell of a lot of heat and trouble. That’s the only 
thing we can be sure of.’ 

Michael shook Hagen’s hand. ‘Do your best,’ he said. ‘I 
don’t want to do another three>year stretch away from home.* 

Hagen said gently, ‘It’s not too late to back out, Mike, we 
can get somebody dse, we can go back over our ^ternatives. 
Maybe it’s not necessary to get rid of Sollozzo.’ 

li^chael laughed. ‘We can talk ourselves into any view- 
point,’ he said. ‘But we figured it right the first time. I’ve been 
riding the gravy train all my life, it’s about time I paid my 
dues.’ 

‘You shouldn’t let that broken jaw influence you,’ Hagen 
said. ‘McQuskey is a stupid man and it was business, not 
personal.’ 

For the second time he saw Michael Q>rleQne’s face freeze 

M9 



into a mask that tcsembled uncannily the Don’s. *Tom» don’t 
let anybody kid you. It’s all personal, every bit of business. 
Every piece of shit every man has to eat every day of his life is 
personal. They call it business. OK. But it’s personal as hell. 
You know where 1 learned that from? The Don. My old man. 
The GodBither. If a bolt of lightning hit a friend of his the old 
man would take it personal. He took my going into the 
Marines personal. That’s what makes him great. The Great 
Don. He takes everything personal. Like God. He knows 
every feather that fsdls from the tail of a sparrow or however 
the hell it goes. Right? And you know something? Accidents 
don’t happen to people who take accidents as a personal insult. 
So I came late, OK, but I’m coming all the way. Damn right, I 
take that broken jaw personal; damn right, I take S0U0220 
trying to kill my father personal.’ He laughed. 'Tell the old 
man I lesuned it all from him and that I’m glad I had this 
chance to pay him back for all he did for me. He was a good 
father.’ He paused and then he said thoughtfully to Hagen, 
'You know, I can never remember him hitting me. Or Sonny. 
Or Freddie. And of course Connie, he wouldn’t even yell at 
her. And tell me the truth, Tom, how many men do you figure 
the Don killed or had killed.’ 

Tom Hagen turned away. 'I’ll tell you one thing you didn’t 
learn from him: talking the way you’re talking now. There are 
things that have to be done and you do them and you never 
talk about them. You don’t try to justify them. They can’t be 
justified. You just do them. Then you forget it.’ 

Michael Corleone frowned. He said quietly, 'As the 
Consigliori^ you agree that it’s dangerous to the Don and our 
Family to let SoUozzo live?’ 

‘Yes,’ Hagen said. 

'OK,’ Michael said. 'Then I have to kill him. 

Michael Corleone stood in front of Jack Dempsey’s restau- 
rant on Broadway and waited for his pickup. He looked at his 
watch. It said five minutes to eight. Sollozzo was going to be 
punctual. Michael had made sure he was there in plenty of 
time. He had been waiting fifteen minutes. 

All during dbe ride from Long Beach into the city he had 


150 



been tqrifig to forget what he had said to Hagen. For if he 
helieved what he said, then his life was set on an irrerocahlc 
course. And yet, could it be otherwise after tonight? He 
might be dead after tonight if he didn't stop all this crap, 
Michael thought grimly. He had to keep his mind on the 
business at hand. Soilozzo was no dummy and McQuskcy was 
a very tough egg. He felt the ache in his vnred jaw and wel- 
comed the pain, it would keep him alert. 

Broadway vrasn’t that crowded on this cold winter night, 
even though it was near theatre time. Michael flinched as a 
long black car pulled up to the kerb and the driver, leaning 
over, opened front door and said, ‘Get in, Mike.* He 
didn't know the driver, a young punk with slick black hair 
and an open shut, but he got in. In the back seat were Captain 
McQuskey and Soilozzo. 

Soilozzo reached a hand over the back of the seat and 
Michael shook if. The hand was Arm, warm and dry. Soilozzo 
said, ‘I*m glad you came, Mike. I hope we can straighten 
everything out. All this is terrible, it's not the way I wanted 
things to happen at ail. It should never have happened.* 
Michael C.orleone said quietly, ‘I hope we can settle things 
tonight, 1 don’t want my father bothered any more.* 

‘He won’t be,* Soilozzo said sincerely. ‘1 swear to you by 
my children he won’t be. Just keep an open mind when we 
.talk. 1 hope you’re not a hothead like your brother Sonny. It’s 
impCssible to talk business with him.’ 

Optain Meduskey grunted. ‘He’s a good kid, he’s all 
right.’ He leaned over to give Michael an affectionate pat on 
the shoulder. ‘I’m sorry about the other night, Mike. I’m 
getting too old for my job, too grouchy. 1 guess I’ll have to 
retire pretty soon. Can’t stand the aggravation, all day 1 get 
aggravation. You know how it is.’ Then with a dolefiil sigh, 
he gave Michael a thorough frisk for a weapon. 

I^diad saw a slight sn^e on the driver’s lips. The car was 
going west with no apparent attempt to elude any trailers. It 
went up on to the West Side Highway, speeding in and out of 
traffic. Anyone following would have had to do the same. 
Then to Mchael’s dismay it took the exit for the George 
Washington Bridge, they were going over to New Jersey. 


*51 



Whoever had given Sonny the info on where the meeting was 
to be held had given him the wrong dope. 

The car threaded through the bridge approaches and then 
was on it, leaving the blaaing city behind. Michael kept his hice 
impassive. Were they going to dump him into the swamps or 
was It just a last-minute change in meeting place by the wily 
S0II0Z20? But when they were nearly all the way across, the 
driver gave the wheel a violent twist. The heavy automobile 
jumped into the air when it hit the divider and bounced over 
into the lanes going back to New York City. Both McCluskey 
and S0II0220 were looking back to see if anyone had tried 
doing the same thing. The driver was really hitting it back to 
New York and then they were off the bridge and going to- 
wards the East Bronx. They went through side streets with no 
cars behind them. By this time it was nearly nine o'clock. They 
had made sure there was no one on their tail. S0II0220 lit up a 
cigarette after offering his pack to McQuskey and Michael, 
both of whom refused. S0II0220 said to the driver, ‘Nice 
work. I’ll remember it.’ 

Ten minutes later the car pulled up in front of a restaurant 
in a small Italian neighbourhood. There was no one on the 
streets and because of the lateness of the hour only a few people 
were still at dinner. Michael had been worried that the driver 
would come in with them, but he stayed outside with his car. 
The negotiator had not mentioned a driver, nobody had. 
Technically Sollozzo had broken the agreement by bringing 
him along. But Michael decided not to mention it, knowing 
they would think he would be afraid to mention it, afraid of 
ruining the chances for the success of the parley. 

The three of them sat at the only round table, Sollozzo re- 
fusing a booth. There were only two other people in the 
restaurant. Michael wondered whether they were Sollozzo 
plants. But it didn’t matter^ Before they could interfere it 
would be all over. 

McCluskey asked with real interest, ‘Is the Italian food 
good here?’ 

Sollozzo reassured him. ‘Try the veal, it’s the finest in New 
York.’ The solitary waiter had brought a bottle of wine to the 
table and uncork^ it. He poured three ghiMfi fiilL Sur- 





priflingly McQuskey did not drink* *I must be the only Irish- 
man who don’t take the boo 2 e/ he said. ‘1 seen too many good 
people get in trouble because of the booze.’ 

Sollozzo said placatingly to the captain, *1 am going to talk 
Italian to Mike, not because I don’t trust you but because 1 
can’t explain myself properly in English and I want to con- 
vince Mike that 1 mean well, that it’s to everybody’s advantage 
for us to come to an agreement tonight. Don’t be insulted by 
this, it’s not that I don’t trust you.’ 

Giptain McCluskey gave them both an ironic grin. ‘Sure, 
you two go right ahead,’ he said. ‘I’U concentrate on my veal 
and spaghetti.’ 

Solloz 20 began speaking to Michael in rapid Sicilian. He 
said, ‘You must understand that what happened between me 
and your father was strictly a business matter. I have a great 
respect for Don Corleone and would beg for the opportunity 
to enter his service. But you must understand that your father 
is an old-fashioned man. He stands in the way of progress. The 
business I am in is the coming thing, the wave of the future, 
there are untold millions of dollars for everyone to make. But 
your father stands in the way because of certain unrealistic 
scruples. By doing this he imposes his will on men like myself. 
Yes, yes, I know, he says to me, “Go ahead, it’s your 
business,” but we both know that is unrealistic. We must tread 
on each other’s corns. What he is really telling me is that 1 
cannot operate my business. 1 am a man who respects himself 
and cannot let another man impose his will on me so what had 
to happen did happen. Let me say that I had the support, the 
silent support of all the New York Families. And the Tattaglia 
Family became my partners. Ifthis quarrel continues, then the 
Corleone Family will stand alone against everyone. Perhaps if 
your hither were well, it could be done. But the eldest son is 
not the man the Godfather is, no disrespect intended. And the 
Irish Consigliwriy Hagen, is not the man Genco Abbandando 
was, God rest his soul. So I propose a peace, a truce. Let us 
cease all hostilities until your father is weU again and can take 
part in these bargainings. The Tattaglia Family agrees, upon 
my persuasions and my indemnities, to forgo justice for their 
son Bruno. We will have peace. Meanwhile, 1 have to make a 


*53 



living and will do a little trading in my business. 1 do not ask 
your cooperation but 1 ask you, the Corleone Family, not to 
interfere. These are my proposals. I assume you have the 
authority to agree, to make a deal.’ 

Michael said in Sicilian, *Tell me more about how you 
propose to start your business, exactly what part my Family 
has to play in it and what profit we can take from this busi- 
ness.’ 

‘You want the whole proposition in detail then?* Sollo 2 zo 
asked. 

Michael said gravely, ‘Most important of all I must have 
sure guarantees that no more attempts will be made on my 
father’s life.’ 

S0II0220 raised his hand expressively. ‘ What guarantees can 
1 give you? I’m the hunted one. I’ve missed my chance. You 
think too highly of me, my friend. I am not that clever.’ 

Michael was sure now that the conference was only to gain a 
few days* time. That Soilo2zo would make another attempt to 
kill the Don. What was beautiful was that the Turk was under- 
rating him as a punk kid. Michael felt that strange delicious 
chill filling his body. He made his face look distressed. Sol- 
lo220 asked sharply, ‘What is itr’ 

Michael said with an embarrassed air, ‘The wine went right 
to my bladder. I’ve been holding it in. Is it all right if I go to 
the bathroom.’ 

Sollo220 was searching his face intently with his dark eyes. 
He reached over and roughly thrust liis hand in Michael’s 
crotch, under it and around, searching for a weapon. Michael 
looked ofiended. McQuskey said curtly, ‘1 frisked him. I’ve 
frisked thousands of young punks. He’s clean.’ 

Spllozzo didn't like it. For no reason at all he didn’t like ft. 
He glanced at the man sitting at a table opposite them 
and raised his eyebrows towards the door of the bathroom. 
The man gave a slight nod that he had checked it, that 
there was nobody inside. SoUozzo said reluctantly, ‘Don’t 
take too long.’ He had marvellous antennae, he was 
nervous. 

Michael got up and went into the bathroom. The urinal had 
a pink bar ^ soap in it secured by a wire net. He went into the 


154 



booth. He really had to go, his bowels were loose. He did it 
very quickly, then reached behind the enamel water cabinet 
un^ his hand touched the small, blunt-nose gun fastened with 
tape. He ripped the gun loose, remembering that Qemenasa 
had said not to worry about leaving prints on the tape. He 
shoved the gun into his waistband and buttoned his jacket 
over it. He washed his hands and wet his hair. He wiped his 
prints off the faucet with his handkerchief. Then he left the 
toilet. 

Sollozzo was sitting directly facing the door of the toilet, his 
dark eyes blazing with alertness. Michael gave a smile. * Now I 
can talk,’ he said with a sigh of relief. 

Captain McGuskey was eating the plate of veal and spaghetti 
that had arrived. The man on the far wall had been stiff with 
attention, now he too relaxed visibly. 

Michael sat down again. He remembered Gemenza had told 
him not to do this, to come out of the toilet and blaze away. 
But either out of some warning instinct or sheer funk he had 
not done so. He had felt that if he had made one swift move he 
would have been cut down. Now he felt safe and he must have 
been scared because he was glad he was no longer standing on 
his legs. They had gone weak with trembling. 

Sollozzo was leaning towards him. Michael, his belly covered 
by the table, unbuttoned his jacket and listened intently. He 
could not understand a word the man was saying. It was 
literaUy gibberish to him. His mind was so fiUed with pound- 
ing blood that no word registered. Underneath the table his 
right hand moved to the gun tucked into his waistband and he 
drew it free. At that moment the waiter came to take their 
order and Sollozzo turned his head to speak to ^e waiter. 
Michael thrust the table away from him with his left hand and 
his right hand shoved the gun almost against Sollozzo’s head. 
The man’s coordination was so acute that he had already begun 
to fling himself away at Michael’s motion. But I^chael, 
younger, his reflexes sharper, pulled the trigger. The bullet 
caught Sollozzo squarely between his eye and his ear and 
when it exited on the other side blasted out a huge gout of 
blood and skull fragments on to the petrified waiter’s jacket. 
Instinctively Michael knew that one bullet was enough. 


*55 



SoUozzo had turned his head in that last moment and he had 
seen the light of life die in the man's eyes as clearly as a candle 
goes out. 

Only one second had gone by as Michael pivoted to bring 
the gun to bear on McQuskey. The police captain was staring 
at Solloz2o with phlegmatic surprise, as if this had nothing to 
do with him. He did not seem to be aware of his own danger. His 
veal-covered fork was suspended in his hand and his eyes were 
just turning on Michael. And the expression on his face, in his 
eyes, held such confident outrage, as if now he expected 
hfichael to surrender or to run away, that Michael smiled at 
him as he pulled the trigger. This shot was bad, not mortal. It 
caught McQuskey in his thick bull-like throat and he started 
to choke loudly as if he had swallowed too large a bite of the 
veal. Then the air seemed to fill with a fine mist of spra 3 red 
blood as he coughed it out of his shattered lungs. Very coolly, 
very deliberately, Michael fired the next shot through the top 
of his white-haired skuU. 

The air seemed to be full of pink mist. Michael swung to- 
wards the man sitting against the wall. This nuin had not made 
a move. He seemed paralysed. Now he carefully showed his 
hands on top of the table and looked away. The waiter was 
staggering back towards the kitchen, an expression of horror 
on his face, staring at Michael in disbelief. SoUozzo was sdll in 
his chair, the side of his body propped up by the table. Mo- 
Quskey, his heavy body pulling downward, had fallen off his 
chair on to the floor. Michael let the gun slip out of his hand so 
that it bounced off his body and made no noise. He saw that 
neither the man against the wall nor the waiter had noticed 
him dropping the gun. He strode the few steps towards the 
doof and opened it. Sollozzo’s car was parked at the kerb still, 
but there was no sign of the driver. Michael turned left and 
around the comer. Headlights flashed on and a battered 
sedan pulled up to him, the door swinging open. He jumped 
in and the car roared away. He saw that it was Tessio at the 
wheel, his trim features hard as marble. 

*Did you do the job on SoUozzo?’ Tessio asked. 

For that moment Michael was struck by the idiom Tessio 
had used. It was always used in a sexual sense, to do the job on 

156 



a woman meant seducing her. It was curious that Tessio used 
it now. ‘ Both of them/ Michael said. 

‘ Sure ? ’ Tessio asked. 

"T saw their brains/ Michael said. 

There was a change of clothes for Michael in the car. 
Twenty minutes later he was on an Italian freighter slated for 
Sicily. Two hours later the freighter put out to sea and from 
his cabin Michael could see the lights of New York Qty 
buri^g like the fires of hell. He felt an enormous sense of 
relief. He was out of it now. The feeling was familiar and he 
remembered being taken off the beach of an island his Marine 
division had invaded. The battle had been still going on but he 
had received a slight wound and was being ferried back to a 
hospital ship. He had felt the same overpowering relief then 
that he felt now. All hell would break loose but he wouldn’t be 
there. 

On the day after the murder of Sollozao and Captain Me- 
Quskey, the police captains and lieutenants in every station 
house in New York City sent out the word ; there would be no 
more gambling, no more prostitution, no more deals of any 
kind until the murderer of Captain McCluskey was caught. 
Massive raids began all over the city. All unlawful business 
activities came to a standstill. 

Later that day an emissary from the Families asked the Cor- 
leone Family if they were prepared to give up the murderer. 
They were told that the affair did not concern them. That 
night a bomb exploded in the Corleone Family mall in Long 
Beach, thrown firom a car that pulled up to the chain, then 
roared away. That night also two button men of the Corleone 
Family were killed as they peaceably ate their dinhfer in a small 
Italian restaurant in Greenwich Village. The Five Families War 
of 1946 had begun. 


157 



Book II 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


Jo HN NT Fontane wavcd a casual dismissal to the manservant 
and said, ‘ Sec you in the morning, Billy. ’ ITie coloured butler 
bowed his way out of the huge dining room-living room with 
its view of the Pacific Ocean. It was a friendly-goodbye sort of 
bow, not a servant's bow, and given only because Johnny 
Fontane had company for dinner. 

Johnny's company was a girl named Sharon Moore, a New 
York Qty Greenwich Village girl in Hollywood to try for a 
small part in a movie being produced by an old flame who had 
made the big time. She had visited the set while Johnny was 
acting in the Wolt2 movie. Johnny had found her young and 
firesh and charming and witty, and had asked her to come to his 
place for dinner that evening. His invitations to dinner were 
already famous and had the force of royalty and of course she 
said yes. 

Sharon Moore obviously expected him to come on very 
strong because of his reputation, but Johmiy hated the Holly- 
wood ‘piece of meat’ approach. He never slept with any girl 
unless foere was something about her he really liked. Except, 
of course, sometimes when he was very drunk and found him- 
self in bed with a girl he didn’t even remember meeting or 
seeing before. And now that he was thirty-five years old, 
divor/ced once, estranged from his second wife, with maybe 
a thousand pubic scalps dangling from his bdt, be simply 
wasn’t that eager. But there was something about Sharon 
Moore that aroused affection in him and so he had invited her 
to dinner. 

He never ate much but he knew young pretty girls am- 
bitiously starved themselves for pretty clothes and were 
usually big eaters on a date so there was plenty of food on the 
table. There was also plenty of liquor: champagne in a bucket, 

158 



Scotch, rye, brandy, 4Uid liqueurs on the sideboard. Johnny 
served the drinks and the plates of food already prepared. 
When they had finished earing he led her into the huge living 
room with its glass wall that looked oik on to the Pacific. He 
put a stack of Ella Fitzgerald records on the hi-fi and settled on 
the conch with Sharon. He made a little small talk with her, 
found out about what she had been like as a kid, whether she 
had been a tomboy or boy crazy, whether she had been homely 
or pretty, lonely or gay. He always ^ound these details touch- 
ing, it always evoked the tenderness he needed to make love. 

They nestled together on the sofa, very friendly, very com- 
fortable. He kissed her on the lips, a cool frien^y kiss, and 
when she kept it that way he left it that way. Outside the huge 
picture window he could sec the dark blue sheet of the Pacific 
lying flat beneath the moonlight. 

‘How come you’re not playing any of your records?’ 
Sharon asked him. Her voice was teasing. Johnny smiled at 
her. He was amused by her teasing him. * I’m not that Holly- 
wood,’ he said. 

‘Play some for me,’ she said. ‘Or sing for me. You know, 
like the movies. I’ll bubble up and melt all over you just like 
those girls do on the screen.’ 

Johnny laughed outright. When he had been younger, he 
had done just such things and the result had always been 
stagy, the girls trying- to look sexy and melting, making their 
eyes swim with desire for an imagined fantasy camera. He 
would never dream of singing to a girl now; for one thing, he 
hadn’t sung for months, he didn’t trust his voice. For another 
thing, amateurs didn’t realize how much professionals de- 
pended on technical help to sound as good as they did. He 
could have played his records but he felt the same shyness 
about hearing his youthful passionate voice as an ageing, balding 
man running to fat feels about showing pictures of himself as a 
youth in the full bloom of manhood. 

‘My voice is out of shape,’ he said. ‘And honesdy. I’m sick 
of hearing myself sing.’ 

They both sipped their drinks. ‘I hear you’re great in this 
picture,’ she said. ‘Is it true you did it for nothing?’ 

‘Just a token payment,’ Johnny said. 



He got up to give her a refill on her brandy glass, gave her a 
gold-monogtammed cigarette and flashed his lighter out to 
hold the light for her. She pufied on the cigarette and sipped 
her drink and he sat down l^ide her again. His glass had con- 
siderably more brandy in it than hers, he needed it to warm 
himself, to cheer himself, to charge himself up. His situation 
was the reverse of the lover’s usual one. He had to get himself 
drunk instead of the girl. The girl was usually too willing 
where he was not. The last two years had been hell on his ego, 
and he used this simple way to restore it, sleeping with a young 
fresh girl for one night, taking her to dinner a few times, 
giving her an expensive present, and then brushing her off in 
the nicest way possible so that her feelings wouldn’t be hurt. 
And then they could always say they had had a thing with the 
great Johnny Fontaric. It wasn’t true love, but you couldn’t 
knock it if the girl was beautiful and genuinely nice. He hated 
the hard, bitchy ones, the ones who screwed for him and then 
rushed off to tell their friends that they’d screwed the great 
Johnny Fontane, always adding that they’d had better. What 
amaaed him more than anything else in his career were the 
complaisant husbands who almost told him to- his face that 
they forgave their wives since it was allowed for even the 
most virtuous matron to be unfuthful with a great singing and 
movie star like Johnny Fontane. That really floored him . 

He loved Ella Fitzgerald on records. He loved that kind of 
dean singing, that kind of dean phrasing. It was the only 
thing in life he really understood and he knew he understood 
it better than anyone dse on earth. Now lying back on the 
couch, the brandy warming his throat, he fdt a desire to sing, 
not music, but to phrase with the records, yet it was something 
impbssible to do in front of a stranger. He put his free hand in 
Shiuron’s lap, sipping his drink from his o^er hand. Without 
any slyness but with the sensualness of a child seeking warmth, 
his hand in her lap pulled up the silk of her dress to show 
milky white thigh above the sheer netted gold of her stockings 
and as always, despite all the women, ^ the years, all the 
fiuniliarhy, Johnny felt the fluid sticky wacmoess flooding 
through his body at that sight. The mirade still happened, and 
what would he do when t^t fidlcd him as his voioe hadP 

160 



He was ready now. He pot his drink down on die long in- 
laid cocktail table and turned his body towards ber. He was 
very sure, very deliberate, and yet tender. There was nothing 
sly or lecherously lascivious in his caresses. He kissed her on 
the lips while his hands rose to her breasts. His hand fell to her 
warm thighs, the skin so silky to his touch. Her returning kiss 
was warm but not passionate and he preferred it that way 
right now. He hated girls who turned on all of a sudden as if 
their bodies were motors galvanized into erode pumpings by 
the touching of a hairy switch. 

Then he did something he always did, something that had 
never yet failed to arouse him. Delicately and as lightly as it 
was possible to do so and still feel something, he brushed the 
dp of his middle dnger deep down between her thighs. Some 
girls never even felt that inidal move towards lovemaking. 
Some were distracted by it, not sure it was a physical touch 
because at the same dme he always kissed them deeply on the 
mouth. Srill others seemed to suck in his hnger or gobble it up 
with a pelvic thrust. And of course before he became famous, 
some girls had slapped his face. It was his whole technique and 
usually it served him well enough. 

Sharon’s reaction was unusual. She accepted it all, the 
touch, the kiss, then shifted her mouth off his, shifted her body 
ever so slightly back along the couch and picked up her drink. 
It was a cool but definite refusal. It happened somedmes. 
Rarely; but it happened. Johnny picked up his drink and lit a 
cigarette. 

She was saying something very sweedy, very lightly. *It*8 
not that I don’t like you, Johnny, you’re much nicer than I 
thought you’d be. And it’s not because I’m not that kind of a 
girl. It’s just that I have to be turned on to do it with a guy, 
you know what I mean?’ 

Johnny Fontane smiled at her. He still liked her. *And 1 
don’t turn you on?’ 

She was a litde embarrassed. 'Well, you know, when you 
were so great singing and all, I was still a Utde kid. I sort of just 
missed you, I was the next generadon. Honest, it’s not that 
I*ffi goody-goody. If you were James Dean or somebody I grew 
op on, rd have my pandes o£ in a second.’ 

i6i 


Godftrhcf- 6 



He didn’t like her quite $o mudt now. She was aweet, the 
was witty, she was int^gent. She hadn’t &llen all ovei herself 
to screw for him or try to hustle him because his connexions 
would help her in show hiz. She was really a straight kid. But 
there was something else he recognized. It had happened a 
few times before. The girl who went on a date with her mind 
all made up not to go to bed with him, no matter how mudi 
she liked him, just so that she could tell her friends, and even 
more, herself, that she had turned down a chance to screw for 
the great Johnny Fontane. It was something he understood 
now that he was older and he wasn’t angry. He just didn’t like 
her quite that much and he had really liked her a lot. 

And now diat he didn’t like her quite so much, he relaxed 
more. He sipped his drink and watched the Pacific Ocean. She 
said, ‘I hope you’re not sore, Johnny. I guess I’m being 
square, I guess in Hollywood a girl’s supposed to put out just 
as casually as kissing a beau goodnight. I just haven’t been 
around long enough.’ 

Johnny smiled at her and patted her cheek. His hand fell 
down to puli her skirt discreetly over her rounded silken 
knees. ‘I’m not sore,’ he said. ‘It’s nice having an old- 
fashioned date.’ Not telling what he felt: the relief at not 
having to prove himself a great lover, not having to live up to 
his screened, godlike image. Not having to listen to the girl 
trying to react as if he really had lived up t;o that image, making 
more out of a very simple, routine piece of ass than it really 
was. 

They had another drink, shared a few more cool kisses and 
then she decided to go. Johnny said politely, ‘Gm I call you 
for dinner some night?’ 

She played it frank and honest to the end. ‘I know you 
don’t want to waste your time and then get disappointed,’ she 
said. ‘Thanks for a wonderful evening. Some day I’ll tell my 
children I had suppei with the great Johnny Fontane all alone 
in his apartment.’ 

He smiled at her. ‘And that you didn’t give in,’ he said. 
They both laughed. ‘They’ll never believe that,’ she said. And 
then Johnny, being a little phony in his turn, said, ‘I’ll give it 
to you in writing, want me to?’ She shook her h^. He con- 

162 



tinued on. ‘Anybody doubts you, give me a buz2 on the phone, 
1*11 straighten them right out. Fll tell them how I chased you 
all around the apartment but you kept your honour. OK?’ 

He had, finally, been a little too cruel and he felt stricken at 
the hurt on her young face. She understood that he was telling 
her that he hadn’t tried too hard. He had taken the sweetness 
of her victory away from her. Now she would feel that it had 
been her lack of charm or attractiveness that had made her the 
victor this night. And being the girl she was, when she told the 
story of how she resisted the great Johnny Fontane, she 
would always have to add with a wry litde smile, ‘Of course, 
he didn’t try very hard.’ So now taking pity on her, he said, ‘ If 
you ever feel real down, give me a ring. c3k? I don’t have to 
shack up every girl 1 know.* 

‘1 wiU,’ she said. She went out the doot. 

He was left with a long evening before him. He could have 
used what Jack Woltz called the ‘meat factory’, the stable of 
willing starlets, but he wanted human companionship. .He 
wanted to talk like a human being. He thought of his first wife, 
Virginia. Now that the work on the picture was finished he 
would have more time for the kids. He wanted to become part 
of their life again. And he worried about Virginia too. She 
wasn’t equipped to handle the Hollywood sharpies who might 
come after her just so that they could brag about having 
screwed Johnny Fontane’s first wife. As far as he knew, no- 
body could say that yet. Everybody could say it about his 
second wife though, he thought wryly. He picked up the 
phone. 

He recognized her voice immediately and that was not sur- 
prising. He had heard it the first time when he was ten years 
old and they had been in 4B together. ‘Hi, Ginny,* he said, 
‘you busy tonight? Can I come over for a little while?* 

‘All right,’ she said. ‘The kids are sleeping though; 1 don’t 
want to wake them up.* 

‘That’s OK,’ he said. ‘1 just wanted to talk to you.* 

Her voice hesitated slightly, then carefully controlled not to 
show any concern, she asked, ‘Is it anything serious, anything 
important?* 

‘No,’ Johnny said. ‘I finished the picture today and I 

165 



thought maybe 1 could just see you and talk to you. Maybe 1 
could take a look at the kids If you*re sure diey won*t wake 
up.* 

*OK,* she said. ‘I’m glad you got that part you wanted.’ 

‘Thanks/ he said. ‘I’ll sec you in about a haLT hour.’ 

When he got to what had been his home in Beverly Hills, 
Johnny Fontane sat in the car for a moment staring at the 
house. He remembered what his Godfather had said, that he 
could make his own life what he wanted. Great chance if you 
knew what you wanted. But what did he want? 

His first wife was waiting for him at the door. She was 
pretty, petite and brunette, a nice Italian girl, the girl next door 
who would never fool around with another man and that had 
been important to him. Did he still want her, he asked himself, 
and the answer was no. For one thing, he could no longer 
make love to her, their affection had grown too old. And 
there were some things, nothing to do with sex, she could 
never forgive him. But they were no longer enemies. 

She made him cofiee and served him homemade cookies to 
the living room. ‘Stretch out on the sofa,’ she said, ‘you look 
tired.’ He took oQ his jacket and his shoes and loosened his tie 
while she sat in the chair opposite liim with a grave little smile 
on her fiice. ‘It’s funny,’ she said. 

‘What’s fonny?’ he asked her, sipping coffee and spilling 
some of it on his shirt, 

‘The great Johnny Fontane stuck without a date,’ she said. 

‘The great Johnny Fontane is lucky if he can even get it up 
any more/ he said. 

It was unusual for him to be so direct. Ginny asked, ‘ Is there 
something really the. matter?’ 

Johnny grinned at her. ‘I had a date with a girl in my apart- 
ment and she brushed me off. And you know, I was relieved.’ 

To his surprise he saw a look of anger pass over Ginny’s 
face. ‘Don’t worry about those little tramps,’ she said. ‘She 
must have thought that was the way to get you interested in 
her.’ And Johnny realized with amusement that Ginny was 
actually angry with the girl who had turned him down. 

‘Ah, what the hell,’ he said. ‘I’m tired of that stuff. I have to 
grow up sometime. And now that 1 can’t sing any more 1 guess 

164 



rU have a tough time with dames. I never got in on my looks, 
you know.’ 

She said loyally, ‘You were always better looking than you 
photographed.’ 

Johnny shook his head. ‘I’m getting fat and I’m getting 
bald. Hell, if this picture doesn’t make me big again I better 
learn how to bake pizzas. Or maybe we’ll put you in the 
movies, you look great.’ 

She looked thirty-five. A good thirty-five, but thirty-five. 
And out here in HoDywood that might as well be a hundred. 
The young beautiful girls thronged through the city like 
lemmings, lasting one year, some two. Some of them so beauti- 
ful they could make a man’s heart almost stop beating until 
they opened their mouths, until the greedy hopes for success 
clouded the loveliness of their eyes. Ordinary women could 
never hope to compete with them on a physical level. And you 
could talk all you wanted to about charm, about intelligence, 
about chic, about poise, the raw beauty of these girls over- 
powered everything else. Perhaps if there were not so many of 
them there might be a chance for an ordinary, nice-looking 
woman. And since Johnny Fontane could have all of them, or 
nearly all of them, Ginny knew that he was saying all this just 
to flatter her. He had always been nice that way. He had always 
been polite to women even at the height of his fame, paying 
them compliments, holding lights for their cigarettes, opening 
doors. And since all this was usually done for him^ it made it 
even more impressive to the girls he went out with. And he 
did it with all girls, even the one-night stands, I-don’t-know- 
your-name girls. 

She smiled at him, a friendly smile. ‘You already made me, 
Johnny, remember? For twelve years. You don’t*havc to give 
me your* line.’ 

He sighed and stretched out on the sofa. ‘No kidding, 
Ginny, you look good. I wish I looked that good.* 

She didn’t answer him. She could see he was depressed. ‘Do 
you think the picture is OK? Will it do you some good?* she 
asked. 

Johnny nodded. ‘Yeah. It could bring me all the way back. 
If I get the Academy thing and play my cards right, I can make 

165 



it big again even without the singing. Then maybe I can give 
you and the kids more dough.* 

* We have more than enough/ Ginny said. 

‘I wanta see more of the kids too/ Johnny said. ‘I want to 
settle down a little bit. Why can’t I come every Friday night 
for dinner here? I swear Til never miss one Friday, I don’t care 
how far away 1 am or how busy 1 am. And then whenever 1 
can rU spend weekends or maybe the kids can spend some 
part of their vacations with me.’ 

Ginny put an ashtray on his chest. ‘It’s OK with me,’ she 
said. ‘I never got married because I wanted you to keep being 
their father.’ She said this without any kind of emotion, but 
Johnny Fontane, staring up at the ceiling, knew she said it as 
an atonement for those other things, the cruel things she had 
once said to him when their marriage had broken up, when his 
career had started going down the drain. 

‘ By the way, guess who called me,* she said. 

Johnny wouldn’t play that game, he never did. ‘Who?’ he 
asked. 

Ginny said, ‘You could take at least one lousy guess.’ 
Johnny didn’t answer. ‘Your Godfather,’ she said. 

Johnny was really surprised. ‘He never talks to anybody on 
the phone. What did he say to you?’ 

‘He told me to help you,’ Ginny said. ‘He said you could be 
as big as you ever were, that you were on your way back, but 
that you needed people to bdieve in you. 1 asked him why 
should I ? And he said because you’re the father of my children. 
He’s such a sweet old guy and they tell such horrible stories 
about him.’ 

Virginia hated phones and she had had all the extensions 
takep out except for the one in her bedroom and one in the 
kitchen. Now they could hear the kitchen phone ringing. She 
went to answer it. When she came back into the living room 
there was a look of surprise on her face. ‘It’s for you, Johnny,’ 
she said. ‘It’s Tom Hagen. He says it’s important.’ 

Johnny went into the kitchen and picked up the phone. 
‘Yeah, Tom,’ he said. 

Tom Hagen’s voice was cooL ‘Johnny, the God&ther wants 
me to come out and see you and set some things up that can 

i66 



help you out now that the picture is finished. He wants me to 
catch the morning plane. Can you meet it in Los Angeles? I 
have to fly back to New York the same night so you won’t 
have to worry about keeping youi night free for me.’ 

‘Sure, Tom/ Johnny said. ‘And don’t worry about me 
losing a night. Stay over and relax a bit. I’ll throw a party and 
you can meet some movie people.’ He always made that offer, 
he didn’t want the folks from his old neighbourhood to think 
he was ashamed of them. 

‘Thanks,* Hagen said, ‘but I really have to catch the early 
morning plane back. OK, you’ll meet the eleven-thirty am out 
of New York?’ 

‘Sure,’ Johnny said. 

‘ Stay in your car,’ Hagen said. ‘ Send one of your people to 
meet me when I get off the plane and bring me to you.’ 

‘Right,’ Johnny said. 

He went back to the living room and Ginny looked at him 
inquiringly. ‘My Godfather has some plans for me, to help me 
out,’ Johnny said- ‘He got me the part in the movie, I doh’t 
know how. But I wish he’d stay out of the rest of it.’ 

He went back on to the sofa. He felt very tired. Ginny said, 
‘ Why don’t you sleep in the guest bedroom tonight instead of 
going home. You can have breakfast with the kids and you 
won’t have to drive home so late. I hate to think of you all 
alone in that house of yours anyway. Don’t you get lonely?’ 

‘I don’t stay home much,’ Johnny said. 

She laughed and said, ‘Then you haven’t changed much.’ 
She paused and then said, ‘Shall 1 fix up the other bedroom?’ 

Johnny said, ‘Why can’t I sleep in your bedroom?’ 

She flushed. ‘No,’ she said. She smiled at him and he smiled 
back. They were still friends. • 

When Johnny woke up the next morning it was late, he 
could tell by the sun coming in through the drawn blinds. It 
never came in that way unless it was in the afternoon. He 
yelled, Tiey, Ginny, do I still rate breakfast?’ And far away he 
heard her voice call, ‘Just a second.’ 

And it was just a second. She must have had everything 
ready, hot in the oven, the tray waiting to be loaded, b^use 
as Johnny lit his first cigarette of the day, the door of the 

167 



bedroom opened and his two small daughters came in wheeling 
the breakfast cart. 

They were so beautiful it broke his heart. Their faces were 
shining and clear, their eyes alive with curiosity and the eager 
desire to run to him. They wore their hair braided old- 
fashioned in long pigtails and they wore old-fashioned frocks 
and white patent-leather shoes. They stood by the breakfast 
cart watching him as he stubbed out his cigarette and waited 
for him to call and hold his arms wide. Then they came 
running to him. He pressed his face between their two fresh 
fragrant cheeks and scraped them with his beard so that they 
shrieked. Ginny appeared in the bedroom door and wheeled 
the breakfast cart the rest of the way so that he could eat in 
bed. She sat beside him on the edge of the bed, pouring bis 
coffee, buttering his toast. The two young daughters sat on 
the bedroom couch watching him. They were too old now for 
pillow fights or to be tossed around. They were already 
smoothing their mussed hair. Oh, Christ, he thought, pretty 
soon they^'ll be all grown up, Hollywood punks will be out 
after them. 

He shared his roast and bacon with them as he ate, gave 
them sips of cofi'ee. It was a habit left over from when he had 
been singing with the band and rarely ate with them so they 
liked to share his food when he had his odd-hour meals like 
afternoon breakfasts ot morning suppers. The change-around 
in food delighted them - to eat steak and french fries at seven 
in the morning, bacon and eggs in the afternoon. 

Only Ginny and a few of his close friends knew how much 
he idolized his daughters. That had been the worst thing about 
the divorce and leaving home. The one thing he had fought 
about, and for, was his position as a father to them. In a very 
sly way he had made Ginny understand he would not be 
pleased by her remarrying, not because he was jealous of her, 
but because he was jealous of his position as a frther. He had 
atraitged the money to be paid to her so it would be enor- 
mously to her advantage ^andally not to remarry.. It was 
understood that she could have lovers as long as they were not 
introduced into her home life. But on this score 1 ^ had ab- 
solute ftddi in her. She had aiwa3r8 been amazingly shy and 

168 



old-fiishiooed in sex. The Hollywood gigolos had batted ztto 
when they started swarming around her, snifHng for the 
fifiAnrial settlement and the favours they could get from her 
famous husband. 

He had no fear that she expected a reconciliation because he 
had wanted to sleep with her the night before. Neither one of 
them wanted to renew their old marriage. She understood his 
hunger for beauty, his irresistible impulse towards young 
women far more beautiful than she. It was known that he 
always slept with his movie co-stars at least once. His boyish 
charm was irresistible to them, as their beauty was to him. 

‘You’ll have to start getting dressed pretty soon,’ Ginny 
said. ‘Tom’s plane will be getting in.’ She shooed the 
daughters out of the room. 

‘Yeah,’ Johnny said. ‘By the way, Ginny, you know I’m 
getting divorced? I’m gonna be a free man again.’ 

She watched him getting dressed. He always kept fresh 
clothes at her house ever since they had come to their new 
arrangement after the wedding of Don Corleone’s daughter. 
‘Christmas is only two weeks away,’ she said. ‘Shall I plan on 
you being here?’ 

It was the first time he had even thought about the holidays. 
When his voice was in shape, holidays were lucrative singing 
dates but even then Christmas was sacred. If he missed this 
one, it would be the second one. Last year he had been court- 
ing his second wife in Spain, trying to get her to marry him. 

‘Yeah,’ he said. ‘Christmas Eve and Christmas.’ He didn’t 
mention New Year’s Eve. That would be one of the wild 
nights he needed every once in a while, to get drunk with his 
friends, and he didn’t want a wife along then. He didn't feel 
guilty about it. 

She helped him put on his jacket and brushed it off. He was 
always fastidiously neat. She could see him frowning because 
the shirt he had put on was not laundered to his taste, the cuff 
links, a pair he had not worn for some time, were a little too 
loud for the way he liked to dress now. She laughed softly and 
said, ‘Tom won’t notice the difference.’ 

llie three women of the funily walked him to the door and 
out on the driveway to his car. The two little girls held his* 

169 



hands, one on each side. His wife walked a little behind him. 
She was getting pleasure out of how happy he looked. When 
he reached his car he turned around and swung each girl in 
turn high up in the air and kissed her on the way down. Then 
he kissed his wife and got into the car. He never liked drawn- 
out goodbyes. 

Arrangements had been made by his PR man and aide. At 
his house a chauffeured car was waiting, a rented car. In it 
were the PR man and another member of his entourage. 
Johnny parked his car and hopped in and they were on their 
way to the airport. He waited inside the car while the PR man 
went out to meet Tom Hagen’s plane. When Tom got into the 
car they shook hands and drove back to his house. 

Finally he and Tom were alone in the living room. There 
was a coolness between them. Johnny had never forgiven 
Hagen for acting as a barrier to his getting in touch with the 
Don when the Don was angry with him, in those bad days 
before Connie’s wedding. Hagen never made excuses for his 
actions. He could not. It was part of his job to act as a light- 
ning rod for resentments which people were too awed to feel 
towards the Don himself though he had earned them. 

‘Your Godfather sent me out here to give you a hand on 
some things,’ Hagen said. ‘I wanted to get it out of the way 
before Christmas.’ 

Johnny Fontanc shrugged. ‘The picture is finished. The 
director was a square guy and treated me right. My scenes are 
too important to be left on the cutdng-room floor just for 
Woltz to pay me off. He can’t ruin a ten-million-dollar picture. 
So now everything depends on how good people think I am in 
the mqvie.’ 

Hagen said cautiously, ‘ Is winning this Academy Award so 
terribly important to an actor’s career, or is it just the usual 
publicity crap that really doesn’t mean anything one way or 
the other?’ He paused and added hastily, ‘Except of course 
the glory, everybody likes glory.’ 

Johnny Fontane grinned at him. ‘Except my Godfather. 
And you. No, Tom, it’s not a lot of crap. An Academy Award 
can make an actor for ten years. He can get his pick of roles. 


170 



The public goes to see him. It^s not everything, but for an 
actor it*s the most important thing in the business. Fm count- 
ing on winning it. Not because Fm such a great actor but 
because I’m known primarily as a singer and the part is fool- 
proof. And Fm pretty good too, no kidding.* 

Tom Hagen shrugged and said, ‘Your Godfather tells me 
that the way things stand now, you don’t have a chance of 
winning the award.* 

Johnny Fontanc was angry. ‘What the hell are you talking 
about? llie picture hasn’t even been cut yet, much less shown. 
And the Don isn’t even in the movie business. Why the hell 
did you fly the three thousand miles just to tell me that shit?* 
He was so shaken he was almost in tears. 

Hagen said worriedly, ‘Johnny, I don’t know a damn thing 
about all this movie stuff. Remember, Fm just a messenger boy 
for the Don. But we have discussed this whole business of 
yours many times. He worries about you, about your future. 
He feels you still need his help and he wants to settle your 
problem once and for all. That’s why Fm here now, to get 
things rolling. But you have to start growing up, Johnny. You 
have to stop thinking about yourself as a singer or an actor. 
You’ve got to start thinking about yourself as a prime mover, 
as a guy with muscle,* 

Johnny Fontane laughed and filled his glass. ‘If 1 don’t win 
that Oscar I’ll have as much muscle as one of my daughters. 
My voice is gone; if I had that back I could make some moves. 
Oh, hell. How docs my Godfather know I won’t win it? 
OK. I believe he knows. He’s never been wrong.’ 

Hagen lit a thin cigar. ‘We got the word that Jack Woltz 
won’t spend studio money to support your candidacy. In fact 
he’s sent the word out to everybody who votes that he does 
not want you to win. But holding back the money for ads and 
all that may do it. He’s also arranging to have one other guy 
get as much of the opposition votes as he can swing. He’s 
using all sorts of bribes - jobs, money, broads, everything. 
And he’s trying to do it without hurting the picture or hurting 
it as little as possible.’ 

Johnny Fontane shrugged. He filled his glass with whisky 
and downed it. ‘Then I’m dead.’ 



Hagen waa watching him widi his mouth cuded up with 
distaste. * Drinking won’t help your voice/ he said. 

‘Fuck you/ Johnny said. 

Hagen’s face suddenly became smoothly impassive. Then he 
said, ‘OK, I’ll keep this purely business.’ 

Johnny Fontane put his drink down and went over to stand 
in front of Hagen. ‘I’m sorry I said that, Tom,’ he said. 
‘Qirist, I’m sorry. I’m taking it out on you because I wanta 
kill that bastard Jack Woltz and I’m afraid to tell off my God- 
frther. So I get sore at you.’ There were tears in his eyes. He 
threw the empty whisky glass against the wall but so weakly 
that the heavy shot glass did not even shatter and rolled along 
the floor back to him so that he looked down at it in baffled 
fury. Then he laughed. ‘Jesus Christ,’ he said. 

He walked over to the other side of the room and sat 
opposite Hagen. ‘You know, I had everything my own way 
for a long time. Then I divorced Ginny and everything started 
going sour. I lost my voice. My records stopped selling. I 
didn’t get any more movie work. And then my Godfather got 
sore at me and wouldn’t talk to me on the phone or see me 
when I came into New York. You were always the guy 
barring the path and I blamed you, but I knew you wouldn’t 
do it without orders from the Don. But you can’t get sore at 
him. It’s like getting sore at God. So I curse you. But you’ve 
been tight all along the line. And to show you I mean my 
apology I’m taking your advice. No more booze until I get 
my voice back. OK?’ 

The apology was sincere. Hagen forgot his anger. There 
must be something to this thirty-five-year-old boy or the 
Don would not be so fond of him. He said, ‘Forget it, Johnny.’ 
He was embarrassed at the depth of Johnny’s feeling and 
embarrassed by the suspicion that it might have been in- 
spired by fear, fear that he might turn the Don against him. 
And of course the Don could never be turned by any- 
one for any reason. His affection was mutable o^y by 
himself. 

‘Things aren’t so bad,’ he told Johnny. ‘The Don says he 
can cancel out everything Woltz does against you. That you 
will almost certainly win the Award. But he f(^8 that won’t 



solve your problem. He wants to know if you have the brains 
and b^s to become a producer on your own, make your own 
movies from top to bottom.* 

‘How the hell is he going to get me the Award?’ Johnny 
asked incredulously. 

Hagen said sharply, ‘How do you find it so easy to believe 
that Woltz can finagle it and your Godfather can’t? Now since 
it’s necessary to get your faith for the other part of our deal I 
must tell you this. Just keep it to yourself. Your Godfather is a 
much more powerful man than Jack Woltz. And he is much 
more powerfol in areas far more critical. How can he swing the 
Award? He controls, or controls the people who control, all 
the labour unions in the industry, all the people or nearly all 
the people who vote. Of course you have to be good, you 
have to be in contention on your own merits. And your God- 
father has more brains than Jack Woltz. He doesn’t go up to 
these people and put a gun to their heads and say, ‘“Vote for 
Johnny Fontane or you are out of a job.” He doesn’t strong- 
arm where strong-arm doesn’t work or leaves too many hard 
feelings. He’ll make those people vote for you because they 
want to. But they won’t want to unless he takes an interest. 
Now just take my word for it that he can get you the Award. 
And that if he doesn’t do it, you won’t get it.’ 

*OK,’ Johnny said. ‘I believe you. And I have the balls and 
brains to be a producer but 1 don’t have the money. No bank 
would finance me. It takes millions to support a movie.’ 

Hagen said dryly, ‘When you get the Award, start making 
plans to produce three of your own movies. Hire the best 
people in the business, the best technicians, the best stars, 
whoever you need. Plan on three to five movies^’ 

‘You’re crazy,’ Johnny said. ‘That many movies could 
mean twenty million bucks.’ 

‘When you need the money,’ Hagen said, ‘get in touch with 
me. I’ll give you the name of the bank out here in California to 
ask for financing. Don’t worry, they finance movies all the 
time. Just ask them for the money in the ordinary way, with 
the proper justifications, like a regular business deal. They will 
approve, l^t first you have to see me and tell me the figures 
and the plans. OK?’ 


-173 



Johnny was silent for a long time. Then he said quietly, *Is 
there anything else?’ 

IJagen smiled. *You mean, do you have to do any &vours 
in return for a loan of twenty million dollars? Sure you will.’ 
He waited for Johnny to say something. ‘Nothing you 
wouldn’t do anyway if the Don asked you to do it for him.’ 

Johnny said, ‘The Don has to ask me himself if it’s some- 
thing serious, you know what I mean? I won’t take your word 
or Sonny’s for it.’ 

Hagen was surprised by this good sense. Fontane had some 
brains after all- He had sense to know that the Don was too 
fond of him, and too smart, to ask him to do something 
foolishly dangerous, whereas Sonny might. He said to 
Johnny, ‘Let me reassure you on one thing. Your Godfather 
has given me and Sonny strict instructions not to involve you 
in any way in anything that might get you bad publicity 
through our fault. And he will never do that himself. I 
guarantee you that any favour he asks of you, you will offer 
to do before he requests it. OK?’ 

Johnny smiled. ‘OK,’ he said. 

Hagen said, ‘Also he has faith in you. He thinks you have 
brains and so he figures the bank will make money on the in- 
vestment, which means he will make money on it. So it’s 
really a business deal, never forget that. Don’t go screwing 
around with the money. You may be his favourite godson but 
twenty million bucks is a lot of dough. He has to stick his neck 
out to make sure you get it.’ 

‘Tell him not to worry,’ Johnny said. ‘If a guy like Jack 
Wolt2 can be a big movie genius, anybody can.’ 

‘ That’s what your Godfather figures,’ Hagen said. ‘ Can you 
have me driven back to the airport? I’ve said aU I have to say. 
When you do start signing contracts for everjrthing, hire your 
own lawyers, I won’t be in on it. But I’d like to see everything 
before you sign,.if that’s OK with you. Also, you’ll never have 
any labour troubles. That will cut costs on your pictures to 
some extent, so when the accountants lump some of that in, 
disregard those figures.’ 

Johnny said cautiously, ‘Do I have to get your OK on any- 
thing else, scripts, stars, any of that?’ 


174 



Hagen shook his head. ‘No/ he said. ‘It may happen that 
the Don would object to something but he’ll object to you 
direct if he docs. But 1 can’t imagine what that would be. 
Movies don’t affect him at all, in any way, so he has no intetest. 
And he doesn’t believe in meddling, that I can tell you from 
experience.’ 

‘Good/ Johnny said, ‘I’ll drive you to the airport myself. 
And thank the Godfather for me. I’d call him up and thank 
him but he never comes to the phone. Why is that, by the 
way?’ 

Hagen shrugged. ‘He hardly ever talks on the phone. He 
doesn’t want his voice recorded, even saying something 
perfectly innocent. He’s afraid that they can splice the words 
together so that it sounds as if he says something else. 1 think 
that’s what it is. Anyway his only worry is that someday he’ll 
be framed by the authorities. So he doesn’t want to give them 
an edge.’ 

They got into Johnny’s car and drove to the airport. Hagen 
was thinking that Johnny was a better guy than he figured. 
He’d already learned something, just his driving him per- 
sonally to the airport proved that. The personal courtesy, 
something the Don himself always believed in. And the 
apology. That had been sincere. He had known Johnny a long 
time and he knew the apology would never be made out of 
feat. Johnny had always had guts. That’s why he had always 
been in trouble, with his movie bosses and with his women. 
He was also one of the few people who was not afraid of the 
Don. Fontane and Michael were maybe the only two men 
Hagen knew of whom this could be said. So the apology was 
sincere, he would accept it as such. He and Johnqy would have 
to sec a lot of each oihet in the next few years. And Johnny 
would have to pass the next test, which would prove how 
smart he was. He would have to do something for the Don 
that the Don would never ask him to do or insist that he do as 
part of the agreement. Hagen wondered if Johnny Fontane 
was smart enough to figure out that part of the bargain. 

After Johnny dropped Hagen off at the airport (Hagen 
insisted that Johnny not hang around for his plane with bim) 


*75 



he drove back to Glnny'a house. She was surprised to see him. 
But he wanted to stay at her place so that he would have time 
to think things out, to make his plans. He knew that what 
Hagen had told him was extremely important, that his whole 
life was being changed. He had once been a big star but now at 
the young age of thirty-five he was washed up. He didn’t kid 
himself about that. Even if he won the Award as best actor, 
what the hell could it mean at the most? Nothing, if his voice 
didn’t come back. He’d be just second-rate, with no real 
power, no real juice. Even that girl turning him down, she had 
been nice and smart and acting sort of hip, but would she have 
been so cool if he had really been at the top? Now with the 
Don backing him with dough he could be as big as anybody in 
Hollywood. He could be a king. Johnny smiled. Hell. He 
could even be a Don. 

It would be nice living with Giony again for a few weeks, 
maybe longer. He’d take the kids out every day, maybe have a 
few friends over. He’d stop drinking and smoking, really take 
care of himself. Maybe his voice would get strong again. If 
that happened and with the Don’s money, he’d be unbeatable. 
He’d really be as close to an old-time king or emperor as it 
was possiNe to be in America. And it wouldn’t depend on his 
voice holding up or how long the public cared about him as an 
actor. It would be an empire rooted in money and the most 
special, the most coveted kind of power. 

Ginny had the guest bedroom made up for him. It was 
understood that he would not share her room, that they would 
not live as man and wife. They could never have that teladon- 
ship again. And though the outside world of gossip columnists 
and n^ovie fims gave the blame for the failure of their marriage 
solely to him, yet in a curious way, between the two of them, 
they both knew that she was even more to blame for their 
divorce. 

When Johnny Fontane became the most popular singer and 
movie musical comedy star in motion pictures, it had never 
occurred to him to desert his wife and children. He was too 
Italian, sdll too old-style. Naturally he had been unfiuthful. 
That had been impossible to avoid in his business and the 
temptations to which he was continually exposed. And de fitf 

176 



being a skinny, delicate-looking guy, he had the wiry hotoi- 
ness of many small-boned Latin types. And women delighted 
him in their surprises. He loved going out with a demure 
sweet-faced virginal-looking girl and then uncapping her 
breasts to find them so unexpectedly slopingly full and rich, 
lewdly heavy in contrast to the cameo face. He loved to find 
sexual shyness and timidity in the sexy-looking girls who were 
all fake motion like a shifty basketball player, vamping as if 
they had slept with a hundred guys, and then when he got 
them alone having to battle for hours to get in and do the job 
and finding out they were virgins. 

And all these Hollywood guys laughed at his fondness for 
virgins. They called it an old guinea taste, square, and look 
how long it took to make a virgin give you a blow job with all 
the aggravation and then they usually turned out to be a lousy 
piece of ass. But Johnny knew that it was how you handled a 
young girl. You had to come or to her the right way and then 
what could be greater than a girl who was tasting her first 
dick and loving it? Ah, it was so great breaking them in. It 
was so great having them wrap their legs around you. Their 
thighs were all different shapes, their asses were different, their 
skins were all different colours and shades of white and brown 
and tan and when he had slept with that young coloured girl 
in Detroit, a good girl, not a hustler, the young daughter of a 
jstzz singer on the same nightclub bill with him, she had been 
one of ^e sweetest things he had ever had. Her lips had really 
tasted like warm honey with pepper mixed in it, her dark 
brown skin was rich, creamy, and she had been as sweet as 
God had ever made any woman and she had been a virgin. 

And the other guys were always talking abouj: blow jobs 
this and other variations and he re^y didn’t enjoy that stuff so 
much. He never liked a girl that much after they tried it that 
way, it just didn’t satisfy him right. He and his second wife 
had finally not got along because she preferred the old sixty- 
nine too much to a point where she didn’t want anything else 
and he had to fight to stick it in. She began making fun of him 
and calling him a square and the word got around that he 
made love like a kid. Maybe that was why that girl last night 
had turned him down. Well, the hell with it, she wouldn’t be 


*77 



too great in the sack anyway. You could tell a girl who really 
liked to fuck and they were always the best. Especially the 
ones who hadn’t been at it too long. What he really hated were 
the ones who had started screwing at twelve and were all 
fucked out by the time they were twenty and just going 
through the motions and some of them were the prettiest of 
all and could fake you out. 

Ginny brought coffee and cake into his bedroom and put it 
on the long table in the sitting room part. He told her simply 
that Hagen was helping him put together the money credit for 
a producing package and she was excited about that. He 
would be important again. But she had no idea of how power- 
ful Don Corleone really was so she didn’t understand the 
significance of Hagen coming from New York. He told her 
Hagen was also helping with legal details. 

When they had finished the coffee he told her he was going 
to work that night, and make phone calls and plans for the 
future. ‘Half of all this will be in the kids’ names,’ he told her. 
She gave him a grateful smile and kissed him goodnight 
before she left his room. 

There was a glass dish full of his favourite monogrammed 
cigarettes, a humidor with pencil-thin black Cuban cigars on 
his writing desk. Johnny tilted back and started making calls. 
His brain was really whirring along. He called the author of 
the book, the best-selling novel, on which his new film was 
based. The author was a guy his own age who had come up the 
hard way and was now a celebrity in the literary world. He had 
come out to flollywood expecting to be treated like a wheel 
and, like most authors, had been treated like shit. Johnny had 
seen the humiliation of the author one night at the Brown 
Derby. The writer had been fixed up with a well-known 
< bosomy starlet for a date on the town and a sure shack-up later. 
But while they were at dinner the starlet had deserted the famous 
author because a ratty-looking movie comic had waggled his 
finger at her. That had given the writer the right slant on just 
who was who in the Hollywood pecking order. It didn’t matter 
that his book had made him world famous,. A starlet would 
prefer the crummiest, the rattiest, the phoniest movie wheel. 

Now Johnny called the author at his New York home to 

178 



thank him for the great part he had written in his book for 
him. He flattered the shit out of the guy. Then casually he 
asked him how he was doing on his next novel and what it was 
all about. He lit a cigar while the author told him about a 
specially interesting chapter and then finally said, ‘Gee, I*d 
like to read it when you’re finished. How about sending me a 
copy ? Maybe I can get you a good deal for it, better than you 
got with Woltz.’ 

The eagerness in the author’s voice told him that he had 
guessed right. Woltz had chiselled the guy, given him peanuts 
for the book. Johnny mentioned that he might be in New 
York right after the holidays and would the author want to 
come and have dinner with some of his friends. ‘I know a few 
good-looking broads,* Johnny said jokingly. The author 
laughed and said OK. 

Next Johnny ^called up the director and cameraman on the 
film he had just finished to thank them for having helped him 
in the film. He told them confidentially that he knew Woltz 
had been against him and he doubly appreciated their help and 
that if there was ever anything he could do for them they 
should just call. 

'Fhen he made the hardest call of all, the one to Jack Woltz. 
He thanked him for the part in the picture and told him how 
happy he would be to work for him any time. He did this 
merely to throw Woltz off the track. He had always been very 
square, very straight. In a few days Woltz would find out 
about this manoeuvring and be astounded by the treachery of 
this call, which was exactly what Johnny Fontane wanted him 
to feel. 

After that he sat at the desk and puffed at his cigar. There 
was whisky on a side table but he had made some sort of 
promise to himself and Hagen that he wouldn’t drink. He 
shouldn’t even be smoking. It was foolish; whatever was 
wrong with his voice probably wouldn’t be helped by knock- 
ing off drinking and smoking. Not too much, but what the 
hell, it might help and he wanted all the percentages with him, 
now that he had a fighting chance. 

Now with the house quiet, his divorced wife sleeping, his 
beloved daughters sleeping, he could think back to that 


*79 



tetfible time in his life when he had deserted them. Deserted 
them for a whore tramp of a bitch who was his second wife. 
But even now he smiled at the thought of her, she was such a 
lovely broad in so many ways and, besides, the only thing that 
saved his life was the day that he had made up his mind never 
to hate a woman or, more specifically, the day he had decided 
he could not afford to hate his first wife and his daughters, his 
girlfriends, his second wife, and the girlfriends after that, 
light up to Sharon Moore brushing him off so that she could 
htSLg about refusing to screw for the great Johnny Fontane. 

He had travelled with the band singing and then he had 
become a radio star and a star of the movie stage shows and 
then he had finally made it in the movies. And in all that time 
he had lived the way he wanted to, screwed the women he 
wanted to, but4ie had never let it affe^ his personal life. Then 
he had fallen for his soon-to-be second wife, Margot Ashton; 
he had gone absolutely crazy for her. His career had gone to 
hell, his voice had gone to h^, his fiuxiily life had gone to hell. 
And there had come the day when he was left without 
anything. 

The thing was, he had always been generous and fair. He 
had given his first wife everything he owned when be di- 
vorced her. He had made sure his. two daughters would get a 
piece of everything he made, every record, every movie, every 
dub date. And when he had been rich and famous he had 
refused his first wife nothing. He had helped out aU her 
brothers and sisters, her father and mother, the girlfriends 
she had gone to school with and their families. He had never 
been a stuck-up celebnty. He had sung at the weddings of his 
wife’s two younger sisters, something he hated to do. He had 
never refused her anything except the complete surrender of 
his own personality. 

And then when he had touched bottom, when he could no 
longer get movie work, when he could no longer sing, when 
his second wife had betrayed him, he had gone to spend a few 
days with Ginny and his ^ughters. He had more or less flung 
himself on her mercy one night because he felt so lousy. That 
day he had heard one of his recordings and he had sounded so 

i8o 



terrible that he accused the sound technidaiis of sabotuging 
the record. Until finally he had become convinced tibat that 
was what his voice really sounded like. He had smashed the 
master record and refused to sing any more. He was so ashamed 
that he had not sung a note except with Nino at Connie 
Corleone’s wedding. 

He had never forgotten the look on Ginny^s face when she 
found out about all his misfortunes. It had passed over her 
face only for a second but that was enough for him never to 
forget it. It was a look of savage and joyful satisfaction. It was 
a look that could only make him believe that she had contemp- 
tuously hated him all these years. She quickly recovered and 
offered him cool but polite sympathy. He had pretended to 
accept it. During the next few days he had gone to see three of 
the gills he had liked the most over the years, girls he had 
remained friends with and sometimes st^ slept with in a 
comradely way, gkls that he had done everything in his power 
to help, girls to whom he had given the equivalent of hundreds 
of thousands of dollars in gifts or job opportunities. On their 
faces he had* caught that same fleeting look of savage satis- 
faction. 

It was during that time that he knew he had to make a 
decision. He could become like a great many other men in 
Holl3rwood, successful producers, writers, directors, actors, 
who preyed on beautiful women with lustful hatred. He could 
use power and monetary favours grudgingly, always alert 
for treason, always believing that women would betray and 
desert him, adversaries to be bested. Or he could refuse to hate 
women and continue to believe in them. 

He knew he could not afford not to love them, that some- 
thing of his spirit would die if he did not continue to love 
women no matter how treacherous and unfidthful they ware. 
It didn’t matter that the women he loved most in the world 
were secretly glad to see him crushed, humiliated, by a way- 
ward fortune ; it did not matter that in the most awful way, not 
sexually, they had been unfaithful to him. He had no choice. 
He had to accept them. And so he made love to all of them, 
gave them presents, hid the hurt their enjoyment of his mis- 
fortunes gave him. He forgave them knowing he was being 

i8i 



paid back for having lived in the utmost freedom from women 
and in the fullest flush of their flavour. But now he never felt 
guilty about being untrue to them. He never felt guilty about 
how he treated Ginny, insisting on remaining the sole father 
of his children, yet never even considering remarrying her, 
and letting her know that too. That was one thing he had 
salvaged out of his fall from the top. He had grown a thick 
skin about the hurts he gave women. 

He was tired and ready for bed but one note of memory 
stuck with him: singing with Nino Valenti. And suddenly he 
knew what would please Don Corleone more than anything 
else. He picked up the phone and told the operator to get him 
New York. He called Sonny Corleone and asked him for 
Nino Valenti’s number. Then he called Nino. Nino sounded a 
little drunk as usual. 

‘ Hey, Nino, how’d you like to come out here and work for 
me,’ Johnny said. ‘I need a guy I can trust.’ 

Nino, kidding arotind, said, ‘Gee, I don’t know, Johnny, I 
got a good job on the truck, bofling housewives along my 
route, picking up a clear hundred-fifty every week. What you 
got tO' offer?* 

* 1 can start you at five hundred and get you blind dates with 
movie stars, how’s that?’ Johnny said. 'And maybe I’ll let you 
sing at my parties.’ 

‘ Yeah, OK, let me think about it,’ Nino said. 'Let me talk it 
over with my lawyer and my accountant and my helper on the 
truck.’ 

‘Hey, no kidding around, Nino,’ Johnny said. 'I need you 
out here. I want you to fly out tomorrow morning and sign a 
personal contract for five hundred a week for a year. Then if 
you steal one of my broads and I fire you, you pick up at least a 
year’s salary. OK?’ 

There was a long pause. Nino’s voice was sober. ‘Hey, 
Johnny, you kidding?’ 

Johnny said, ‘I’m serious, kid. Go to my agent’s office in 
New York. They’ll have your plane ticket and some cash. I’m 
gonna call them first thing in the morning. So you go up there 
in the afternoon. OK? Then I’ll have somebody meet you at 
the plane and bring you out to the house.’ 

182 



Again there was a long pause and then Ninons voice, very 
subdued, uncertain, said, ‘OK, Johnny/ He didn’t sound 
drunk any more. 

Johnny hung up the phone and got ready for bed. He felt 
better than any time since he had smashed that master record. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


joHNNYFoNTANKsatin the huge recording studio and figured 
costs on a yellow pad. Musicians were filing in, all of them 
friends he had known since he was a kid singer with the 
bands. The conductor, top man in the business of pop accom- 
paniment and a man who had been kind to him when things 
went sour, was giving each musician bundles of music and 
verbal instructions. His name was Eddie Neils. He had taken 
on this recording as a favour to Johnny, though his schedule 
was crowded. 

Nino Valenti was sitting at a piano fooling around ner- 
vously with the keys. He was also sipping from a huge glass of 
rye. Johnny didn’t mind that. He knew Nino sang just as well 
drunk as sober and what they were doing today wouldn’t 
require any real musicianship on Nino's part. 

Eddie Neils had made special arrangements of some old 
Italian and Sicilian songs, and a special job on the duel-duet 
song that Nino and Johnny had sung at Connie Corleone’s 
wedding. Johnny was making the record primarily because he 
knew that the Don loved such songs and it would be a perfect 
Christmas, gift for him. He also had a hunch that the record 
would sell in the high numbers, not a million, of course. And 
he had figured out that helping Nino was how the Don wanted 
his payoff. Nino was, after all, another one of the Don's god- 
children. 

Johnny put his clipboard and yellow pad on the folding 
chair beside him and got up to stand beside the piano. He said, 
‘Hey, paisan* and Nino glanced up and tried to smile. He 
looked a little sick. Johnny leaned over and rubbed his 

183 



shoulder blades. *Relax, kid,* he said. ‘Do a good job today 
and rii fix you up with the best and most famous piece of ass 
ill Hollywood.’ 

Nino took a gulp of whisky. ‘Who’s that. Lassie?’ 

Johnny laughed. ‘No, Deanna Dunn. I guarantee the 
goods.* 

Nino was impressed but couldn’t help saying with pseudo- 
hopefulness, ‘You can’t get me Lassie?’ 

The orchestra swung into the opening song of the medley. 
Johnny Fontane listened intently. Eddie Neils would play all 
the songs through in their special arrangements. Then would 
come the first take for the record. As Johnny listened he made 
mental notes on exactly how he would handle each phrase, 
how he would come into each song. He knew his voice 
wouldn’t last long, but Nino would be doing most of the 
singing, Johnny would be singing under him. Except of 
course in the duet-duel song. He would have to save himself 
for that. 

He pulled Nino to his feet and they both stood by their 
microphones. Nino flubbed the opening, flubbed it again. His 
face was beginning to get red with embarrassment. Johnny 
kidded him, ‘Hey, you stalling for overtime?’ 

‘I don’t feel natund without my mandolin,’ Nino said. 

Johnny thought that over for a moment. ‘Hold that glass of 
hoo 2 c in your hand,’ he said. 

It seemed to do the trick. Nino kept drinking from the glass 
as he sang but he was doing fine. Johnny sang easily, not 
straining, his voice merely dancing around Nino’s main 
melody. There was no emotional satis^ction in this kind of 
singing but he was amazed at his own technical skill. Ten 
years of vocalizing had taught him something. 

When, they came to the duet-duel song that ended the 
record, Johnny let his voice go and when they finished his 
vocal chords ached. The musicians had been carried away by 
the last song, a rare thing for these calloused veterans. They 
hammered down their instruments and 8tanq>ed their feet in 
approval as applause. The drummer gave diem a ruffle of 
dnims. 

With stops and conferences they worked nearly four hours 

184 



before they quit. Eddie Neils came over to Johnny and said 
quietly, ‘You sounded pretty good, kid. Maybe you’re ready to 
do a record. I have a new song that’s perfect for you.’ 

Johnny shook his head. ‘Come on, Eddie, don’t kid me. 
Besides in a couple of hours I’ll be too hoarse to even talk. Do 
you think we’ll have to fix up much of the stuff we did today?* 

Eddie said thoughtfully, ‘Nino will have to come into the 
studio tomorrow. He made some mistakes. But he’s much 
better than 1 thought he would be. As for your stuff. I’ll have 
the sound engineers fix anything I don’t like. OK?’ 

‘OK,’ Jolmny said. ‘When can I hear the pressing?’ 

‘Tomorrow night,’ Eddie Neils said. ‘Your place?’ 

‘Yeah,’ Johnny said. ‘Thanks, Eddie. See you tomorrow.’ 
He took Nino by the arm and walked out of the studio. They 
went to his house instead of Ginny’s. 

By this time it was late afternoon. Nino was still more than 
half-drunk. Johnny told him to get under the shower and 
then take a snooze. They had to be at a big party at eleven that 
night. 

When Nino woke up, Johnny briefed him. ‘This party is a 
movie star Lonely Hearts Qub,’ he said. ‘These broads to- 
night are dames you’ve seen in the movies as glamour queens 
millions of guys would give their right arms to screw. And the 
only reason they’ll be at the party tonight is to find somebody 
to shack them up. Do you know why? Because they are 
hungry for it, they are just a little old. And just like every 
dame, they want it with a little bit of class.’ 

‘ What's the matter with your voice ? ’ Nino asked. 

Johnny had been speaking almost in a whisper. ‘Every 
time after 1 sing a little bit that happens. 1 won’t be able to 
sing for a month now. But I’ll get over the hoarseness in a 
couple of days.’ 

Nino said thoughtfully, ‘Tough, huh?’ 

Johnny shrugged. ‘Listen, Nino, don’t get too drunk to- 
night. You have to show these Hollywood broads that my 
paisan buddy ain’t weak in the poop. You gotta come across. 
Remember, some of these dames are very powerful in movies,, 
they can get you work. It doesn’t hurt to be charming after 
you knock off a piece.’ 


185 



Nino was already pouring himself a diink. always 
charming/ he said. He drained the glass. Grinning, he asked. 
‘No kidding, can you really get me close to Deanna Dunn?’ 

‘Don’t be so anxious/ Johnny said. ‘It’s not going to be 
like you think.’ 

The Hollywood Movie Star Lonely Hearts Club (so called 
by the young juvenile leads whose attendance was mandatory) 
met every Friday night at the palatial, studio-owned home of 
Roy McElroy, press agent or rather public relations counsel 
for the Woltz International Film Corporation. Actually, 
though it was McElroy’s open house party, the idea had come 
from the practical brain of Jack Woltz himself. Some of his 
money-making movie stars were getting older now. Without 
the help of special lights and genius makeup men they looked 
their age. They were having problems. They had also become, 
to some extent, desensitized physically and mentally. They 
could no longer ‘fall in love’. They could no longer assume 
the role of hunted women. They had been made too imperious; 
by money, by fame, by their former beauty, Woltz gave his 
parties so that it would be easier for them to pick up lovers, 
one-night stands, who, if they had the stuff, could graduate 
into full-time bed partners and so work their way upward. 
Since the action sometimes degenerated into brawls or sexual 
excess that led to trouble with the police, Woltz decided to 
hold the parties in the house of the public relations counsellor, 
who would be right there to fix things up, pay off newsmen 
and police officers and keep everything quiet. 

For certain virile young male actors on the studio payroll 
who had not yet achieved stardom or featured roles, atten- 
dance at the Friday night parties was a not always pleasant 
duty. This was explained by the fact that a new film yet to be 
released by the studio would be shown at the party. In fact that 
was the excuse for the party itself. People would say, ‘Let’s go 
over to see what the new picture so and so made is like.’ And 
so it was put in a professional context. 

Young female starlets were forbidden to attend the Friday 
night parties. Or rather discouraged. Most of them took the 
hint. 


i86 



Screenings of the new movies took place at midnight and 
johnny and Nino arrived at eleven. Roy McElroy proved to 
be, at first sight, an enormously likeable man, well-groomed, 
beautifully dressed. He greeted Johnny Fontane with a sur- 
prised cry of delight. *What the hell are you doing here?* he 
said with genuine astonishment. 

Johnny shook his hand. ‘I’m showing my country cousin 
the sights. Meet Nino.’ 

McElroy shook hands with Nino and gazed at him ap- 
praisingly. ‘They’ll eat him up alive/ he said to Johnny. He 
led them to the rear patio. 

The rear patio was really a series of huge rooms whose glass 
doors had been opened to a garden and pool. There were 
almost a hundred people milling around, all with drinks in 
their hands. The patio lighting was artfully arranged to flatter 
feminine faces and skin. These were women Nino had seen on 
the darkened movie screens when he had been a teenager. 
They had played their part in his erotic dreams of adolescence. 
But seeing them now in the flesh was like seeing them in some 
horrible makeup. Nothing could hide the tiredness of their 
spirit and their flesh; time had eroded their godhead. They 
posed and moved as charmingly as he remembered but they 
were like wax fruit, they could not lubricate his glands. Nino 
took two drinks, wandered to a table where he could stand 
next to a nest of bottles. Johnny moved with him. They drank 
together until behind them came the magic voice of Deanna 
Dunn. 

Nino, like millions of other men, had that voice imprinted on 
his brain forever. Deanna Dunn had won two Academy 
Awards, had been in the biggest movie grosser made in Holly- 
wood. On the screen she had a feline feminine 'charm that 
made her irresistible to all men. But the words she was saying 
had never been heard on the silver screen. ‘Johnny, you 
bastard, I had to go to my psychiatrist again because you gave 
me a one-night stand. How come you never came back for 
seconds?’ 

Johnny kissed her on her proflered cheek. ‘You wore me 
out for a month,’ he said. ‘ I want you to meet my cousin Nino. 
A nice strong Italian boy. Maybe he can keep up with you.’ 

187 



Deanna Dunn turned to give Nino a cool look. ‘Does he 
like to watch previews?’ 

Johnny laughed. don’t think he’s ever had the chance. 
Why don’t you break him in?’ 

Nino had to take a big drink when he was alone with 
Deanna Dunn. He was trying to be nonchalant but it was hard. 
Deanna Dunn had the upturned nose, the clean-^nit classical 
features of the AnglchSazon beauty. And he knew her so well. 
He had seen her alone in a bedroom, heartbroken, weeping 
over her dead diet husband who had left her with fatherless 
children. He had seen her angry, hurt, humiliated, yet with a 
shining dignity when a caddish Qark Gable had taken ad- 
vantage of her, then left her for a scxpot. (Deanna Dunn never 
played sexpots in the movies.) He had seen her flushed with 
requited love, writhing in the embrace of the man she adored 
and he had seen her die beautifully at least a half dozen times. 
He had seen her and heard her and dreamed about her and yet 
he was not prepared for the first thing she said to him alone. 

‘Johnny is one of the few men with balls in this town,’ she 
said. ‘The rest are all fags and sick morons who couldn’t get h 
up with a broad if you pumped a truckload of Spanish fly into 
their scrotums.’ She took Nino by the hand and led him into a 
comer of the room, out of traflic and out of competition. 

Then still coolly charming, she asked him about himself. He 
saw through her. He saw that she was playing the role of the 
rich society girl who is being kind to the stableboy or the 
chauffeur, but who in the movie would either discourage his 
amatory interest (if the part were played by Spencer Tracy), or 
throw up everything in her mad desire for him (if the part were 
played by Qark Gable). But it didn’t matter. He found himself 
tellMg her about how he and Johnny had grown up together 
in New York, about how he and Johnny had sung together on 
little club dates. He found her marvellously sympathetic and 
interested. Once she asked casually, ‘Do you know how 
Johnny made that bastard Jack Woltz give him the part?’ 
Nino froze and shook his head. She didn’t pursue it. 

The time had come to see the preview of a new Woltz 
movie. Deanna Dunn led Nino, her warm hand imprisoning 
his, to an interior room of the mansion that had no windows 


i88 



bot was fu rni s h ed with about fifty stuaU two-petson couches 
scattered around in such a way as to give es^ one a little 
island of semiprivacy. 

Nino saw there was a smaU table beside the couch and on 
the table were an ice bowl, glasses, and bottles of liquor plus a 
tray of cigarettes. He gave Deanna Dunn a cigarette, lit it and 
then mixed them both drinks. They didn’t speak to each other. 
After a few minutes the lights went out. 

He had been expecting something outrageous. After all, he 
had heard the legends of Hollywood depravity. But he was not 
quite prepared for Deanna Dunn’s voracious plummet on his 
sexual organ without even a courteous and friendly word of 
preparation. He kept sipping his drink and watching the 
mode, but not tasting, not seeing. He was excited in a way he 
had never been before but part of it was because this woman 
servicing him in the dark had been the object of his adolescent 
dreams. 

Yet in a way his masculinity was insulted. So when the 
world-famous Deanna Dunn was sated and had tidied him up, 
he very coolly fixed her a fresh drink in the darkness and Ik her 
a fresh cigarette and said in the most relaxed voice imaginable, 
‘This looks like a pretty good movie.’ 

He felt her stilfen beside him on the couch. Could it be she 
was waiting for some sort of compliment? Nino poured his 
glass full from the nearest bottle his hand touched in die 
darkness. The hell with that. She’d treated him like a god- 
damn male whore. For some reason now he felt a cold anger 
at all these women. They watched the picture for another 
fifteen minutes. He leaned away from her so their bodies did 
not touch. 

Finally she said in a low harsh whisper, ‘Don’t be such a 
snotty punk, you liked it. You were as big as a house.’ 

Nino sipped his drink and said in natural off-hand 
manner, ‘That’s the way it always is. You should see it when I 
get excited.’ 

She laughed a little and kept quiet for the rest of the picture. 
Finally it was over and the lights w^nt on. Nino took a look 
around. He could sec there had been a ball here in the darkness 
though oddly enough he hadn’t heard a thing. But some of the 

189 



dames had that hard, shiny, bright-eyed look of women who 
had just been worked over real good. They sauntered out of 
the projection room. Deanna Dunn left him immediately to go 
over and talk to an older man Nino recognized as a famous 
featured player, only now, seeing the guy in person, he 
realized that he was a fag. He sipped his drink thoughtfully. 

Johnny Fontane came up ^side him and said, ‘Hi, old 
buddy, having a good time?’ 

Nino grinned. ‘I don’t know. It’s different. Now when I go 
back to the old neighbourhood 1 can say Deanna Dunn had 
me.* 

Johnny laughed. ‘She can be better than that if she invites 
you home with her. Did she?* 

Nino shook his head. ‘1 got too interested in the movie,’ he 
said. But this time Johnny didn’t laugh. 

‘ Get serious, kid,’ he said. ‘A dame like that can do you a lot 
of good. And you used to boff anything. Man, sometimes I still 
get nightmares when I remember those ugly broads you used 
to bang.’ 

Nino waved his glass drunkenly and said very loud, ‘Yeah, 
they were ugly but they were women.* Deanna Dunn, in the 
corner, turned her head to look at them. Nino waved his glass 
at her in greeting. 

Johnny Fontane sighed. *OK, you’re just a guinea peasant.' 

‘And 1 ain’t gonna change,’ Nino said with his charmingly 
drunken smile. 

Johnny understood him perfectly. He knew Nino was not as 
drunk as he pretended. He knew that Nino was only pretend- 
ing so that he could say things which he felt were too rude to 
say to his new Hollywood padrone when sober. He put his arm 
around Nino’s neck and said affectionately, ‘You wise guy 
bum, you know you got an ironclad contract for a year and 
you can say and do anything you want and I can’t fire you.’ 

‘You can’t fire me?’ Nino said with drunken cunning. 

‘No,* Johnny said. 

‘Then fuck you,’ Nino said. 

For a moment Johnny was surprised into anger. He saw the 
careless grin on Nino’s face. But in the past few years he must 
have got smarter, or his own descent from stardom had 


190 



made him more sensitive. In that moment he understood Nino, 
why his boyhood singing partner had never become successful, 
why he was trying to destroy any chance of success now. That 
Nino was reacting away from all the prices of success, that in 
some way he felt insulted by everything that was being done 
for him. 

Johnny took Nino by the arm and led him out of the house. 
Nino could barely walk now. Johnny was talking to him 
soothingly. ‘OK, kid, you just sing for me, I wanta make 
dough on you. I won't try to run your life. You do whatever 
you wanta do. OK, pMsan? All you gotta do is sing for me anc^ 
earn me money now that 1 can't sing any more. You got that, 
old buddy?’ 

Nino straightened up. ‘I’ll sing for you, Johnny,’ he said, 
his voice slurring so that he could barely be understood. ‘ I’m 
a better singer than you now. I was always a better singer than 
you, you know that?’ 

Johnny stood there thinking; so that was it. He knew that 
when his voice was healthy Nino simply wasn’t in the same 
league with him, never had been in those years they had sung 
together as kids. He saw Nino was waiting for an answer, 
weaving drunkenly in the California moonlight. ‘Fuck you,’ 
he said gently, and they both laughed together like the old days 
when they had both been equally young. 

When Johnny Fontane got word about the shooting of Don 
Corleone he not only worried about his Godfather, but also 
wondered whether the financing for his movie was still alive. 
He had wanted to go to New York to pay his respects to his 
Godfather in the hospital but he had been told not to get any 
bad publicity, that was the last thing Don Corleone would 
want. So he waited. A week later a messenget came from Tom 
Hagen. The financing was still on but for only one picture at a 
time. 

Meanwhile Johnny let Nino go his own way in Hollywood 
and California, and Nino was doing all right with the young 
starlets. Sometimes Johnny called him up for a night out to> 
gether but never leaned on him. When they talked about the 
Don getting shot, Nino said to Johnny, ‘You know, once 1 


191 



asked the Don for a job in his organmtion and he wouldn’t 
give it to me. 1 was tired of driving a truck and 1 wanted to 
make a lot of dough. You know what he told me? He says 
every man has only one destiny and that my destiny was to be 
an artist. Meaning that 1 couldn’t be a racket guy.’ 

Johnny thought that one ovtstl The Godfather must be just 
about the smartest guy in the world. He’d known imme- 
diately that Nino could never make a racket guy, would only 
get himself in trouble or get killed. Get killed with just one of 
his wisecracks. But how did the Don know that he would be 
an artist? Because, goddamn it, he figured that someday I’d 
help Nino. And how did he figure that? Because he wotild 
drop the word to me and I would try to show my gratitude. 
Of course he never asked me to do it. He just let me know it 
would make him happy if I did it. Johnny Fontane sighed. 
Now the Godfather was hurt, in trouble, and he could kiss the 
Academy Award goodbye with Woltz working against him 
and no help on his side. Only the Don had the personal con- 
tacts that could apply pressure and the Corleone Family had 
other things to think about. Johnny had ofiered to help, Hagen 
had given him a curt no. 

Johimy was busy getting his own picture going. The author 
of the book he had starred in had finished his new novel and 
"came west on Johnny’s invitation, to talk it over without 
agents or studios getting into the act. The second book was 
perfect for what Johnny wanted. He wouldn’t have to sing, it 
had a good gutsy story with plenty of dames and sex and it 
had a part that Johimy instantly recognized as tailor-made for 
Nino. The character talked like Nino, acted like him, even 
looked like him. It was uncanny. All Nino would have to do 
would be to get up on the screen and be himself. 

Johnny worked fast. He found that he knew a lot more 
about production than he thought he did, but he hired an exe- 
cutive producer, a man who knew his stuff but had trouble 
finding work because of the blacklist. Johnny didn’t take ad- 
vantage but gave the man a fair contract. * I expect you to save 
me more dough this way,’ he told the man frankly. 

So he was surprised when the executive producer came to 
him and told him the union rep had to be taken care of to die 


191 



tune of fifty thousand dollars. There were a lot of problems 
dealing with overtime and hiring and the fifty thousand 
dollars would be well spent. Johnny debated whethei the 
executive producer was husding him and then said, ‘ Send the 
union guy to me.’ 

The union guy was Billy Goffl Johnny said to him, ‘I 
thought the union stuff was i^ed by my friends. I was told not 
to worry about it. At all.’ 

Goff said, ‘Who told you that?’ 

Johnny said, ‘You know goddamn well who told me. I 
won’t say bis name but if he tells me something that’s it.’ 

Goff said, ‘Things have changed. Your friend is in trouble 
and his word don’t go this far west any more.’ 

Johnny shrugged. ‘See me in a couple of days. OK?’ 

Goff smiled. ‘Sure, Johnny,’ he said. ‘But calling in New 
York ain’t going to help you.’ 

But calling New York did help. Johnny spoke to Hagen at 
his office. Hagen told him bluntly not to pay. ‘Your God- 
father will be sore as hell if you pay that bastard a dime,’ he 
told Johnny. ‘It will make the Don lose respect and right now 
he can’t afford that.’ 

‘Can I talk to the Don?’ Johnny asked. ‘Will you talk to 
him? I gotta get the picture rolling.’ 

‘Nobody can talk to the Don right now,’ Hagen said. ‘He’s 
too sick. I’ll talk to Sonny about fixing things up. But I’ll make 
the decision on this. Don’t pay that smart bastard a dime. If 
anything changes. I’ll let you know.’ 

Annoyed, Johnny hung up. Union trouble could add a 
fortune to making the film and screw up the works generally. 
For a moment he debated slipping Goff the fifty grand on the 
quiet. After all, the Don telling him something and Hagen 
telling him something and giving him orders were two 
different things. But he decided to wait for a few days. 

By waiting he saved fifty thousand dollars. Two nights 
later, Goff was found shot to death in his home in Glendale. 
There was no more talk of \mion trouble. Johnny was a little 
shaken by the killing. It was the first time the long arm of the 
Don had struck such a lethal blow so dose to him. 

As the weeks went by and he became busier and busier with 

*93 

Godfather- 7 



getting the script ready, casting the movie, and working out 
production details, Johnny Fontane forgot about his voice, his 
not being able to sing. Yet when the Academy Award nomi- 
nations came out and he found himself one of the candidates, 
he was depressed because he was not asked to sing one of the 
songs nominated for the Oscar at the ceremony that would be 
televised nationally. But he shrugged it oflF and kept working. 
He had no hope of winning the Academy Award now that his 
Godfather was no longer able to put pressure on, but getting 
the nomination had some value. 

The record he and Nino had cut, the one of Italian songs, 
was selling much better than anything he had cut lately, but he 
knew that it was Nino’s success more than his. He resigned 
himself to never being able to again sing professionally. 

Once a week he had dinner with Ginny and the kids. No 
matter how hectic things got he never skipped that duty. But 
he didn’t sleep with Ginny. Meanwhile his second wife had 
hnagled a Mexican divorce and so he was a bachelor again. 
Oddly enough he was not that frantic to bang starlets who 
would have been easy meat. He was too snobbish really. He 
was hurt that none of the young stars, the actresses who were 
still on top, ever gave him a tumble. But it was good to work 
hard. Most nights he would go home alone, put his old records 
on the player, have a drink, and hum along with them for a 
few bars. He had been good, ^mn good. He hadn’t realized 
how good he was. Even aside from the special voice, which 
could have happened to anybody, he was good. He had been a 
real artist and never knew how much he loved it. He’d ruined 
his voice with booze and tobacco and broads just when he 
really knew what it was all about. 

Sometimes Nino came over for a drink and listened with 
him and Johnny would say to him scornfully, ‘You guinea 
bastard, you never sang like that in your Itfe.’ And Nino 
would give him that curiously charming smile and shake his 
head and say, ‘No, and I never will,’ in a sympathetic voice, as 
if he knew what Johnny was thinking. 

Finally, a week before shooting the new picture, the Aca- 
demy Award night rolled around. Johnny invited Nino to 
come along but Nino refused. Johnny said, ‘Buddy, 1 never 


194 



asked you a &vour, right? Do me a £aivour tonight and come 
with me. You’re the only guy who’ll really feel sorry for me 
if I don’t win.’ 

For one moment Nino looked startled. Then he said, ‘Sure, 
old buddy, 1 can make it.’ He paused for a moment and said, 
‘If you don’t win, forget it. Just get as drunk as you can get 
and I’ll take care of you. Hell, I won’t even drink myself to- 
night. How about that for being a buddy?’ 

‘Man,’ Johnny Fontane said, ‘that’s some buddy.’ 

The Academy Award night came and Nino kept his 
promise. He came to Johnny’s house dead sober and they left 
for the presentation theatre together. Nino wondered why 
Johnny hadn’t invited any of his girls or his ex-wives to the 
Award dinner. Especially Ginny. Didn’t he think Ginny 
would root for him? Nino wished he could have just one 
drink, it looked like a long bad night. 

Nino Valenti found the whole A cademy Award affair a bore 
imtil the winner of the best male actor was announced. When 
he heard the words ‘Johnny Fontane’, he found himself 
jumping into the air and applauding. Johnny reached out a 
hand for him to shake and Nino shook it. He knew his buddy 
needed human contact with someone he trusted and Nino felt 
an enormous sadness that Johnny didn’t have anyone better 
than himself to touch in his moment of glory. 

What followed was an absolute nightmare. Jack Woltz’s 
picture had swept all the major awards and so the studio’s 
party was swamped with newspaper people and all the on-the- 
make hustlers, male and female. Nino kept his promise to 
remain sober, and he tried to watch over Johnny. But the 
women of the party kept pulling Johnny Fontanft into bed- 
rooms for a litde chat and Johnny kept getting drunker and 
dnmker. 

Meanwhile the woman who had won the award for the best 
actress was suffering the same fate but loving it more and 
handling it better. Nino turned her down, the only man at the 
party to do so. 

Finally somebody had a great idea. The public mating of the 
two winners, everybody else at the party to be spectators in 
the stands. The actress was stripped down and the other 


195 



women started to undress Johnny Fontanc. It was then that 
Nino, the only sober person there, grabbed the half-clothed 
Johnny and slung him over his shoulder and fought his way 
out of the house and to* their car. As he drove Johnny home, 
Nino thought that if that was success, he didn’t want it. 


196 



Book in 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


The Don was a real man at the age of twelve. Short, dark, 
slender, living in the strange Moorish-looking village of 
Corleonc in Sicily, he had been born Vito Andolini, but when 
strange men came to kill the son of the man they had murdered, 
his mother sent the young boy to America to stay with friends. 
And in the new land he changed his name to Corlcone to 
preserve some tie with his native village. It was one of the few 
gestures of sentimeht he was ever to make. 

In Sicily at the turn of the century the Mafia was the second 
government, far more powerful than the official one in Rome. 
Vito Corleone’s fathcl became involved in a feud with another 
villager who took his case to the Mafia. The father refused to 
knuckle under and in a public quarrel killed the local Mafia 
chief. A week later he himself was found dead, his body torn 
apart by lupara blasts. A month after the funeral Mafia gunmen 
came inquiring after the young boy, Vito. They had decided 
that he was too close to manhood, that he might try to avenge 
the death of his father in the years to come. The twclve-ycar- 
old Vito v/as hidden by relatives and shipped to America, 
There he was boarded with the Abbandandos, whose son 
Genco was later to become Consigliori to his Don. 

Young Vito went to work in the Abbandando grocery store 
on Ninth Avenue in New York’s Hell’s Kitchen, At the age of 
eighteen Vito married an Italian girl freshly arrived from 
Sicily, a girl of only sixteen but a skilled cook, a good house- 
wife. They setded down in a tenement on Tenth Avenue, near 
35 th Street, only a few blocks from where Vito worked, and 
two years later were blessed with their first child, Sanuno, 
called by aU his firiends Sonny because of his devotion to his 
father. 

In the neighbourhood lived a man called Fanucci. He was a 

197 



heavy-set, fierce-looking Italian who wore expensive light- 
coloured suits and a cream-coloured fedora. This man was 
reputed to be of the ‘Black Hand*, an offshoot of the Mafia 
which extorted money from families and storekeepers by 
threat of physical violence. However, since most of the in- 
habitants of the neighbourhood were violent themselves, 
Fanucci's threats of bodily harm were effective only with 
elderly couples without male children to defend them. Some 
of the storekeepers paid him trifling sums as a matter of con- 
venience. However, Fanucd was also a scavenger on fellow 
criminals, people who illegally sold Italian lottery or ran 
gambling games in their homes. The Abbandando grocery 
gave him a small tribute, this despite the protests of young 
Genco, who told his father he would settle the Fanucci hash. 
His father forbade him. Vito Corleone observed all this with- 
out feeling in any way involved. 

One day Fanucci was set upon by three young men who cut 
his throat from ear to ear, not deeply enough to kill him, but 
enough to frighten him and make him bleed a great deal. Vito 
saw Fanucci fleeing from his punishers, the circular slash 
flowing red. What he never forgot was Fanucci holding the 
cream-coloured fedora under his chin to catch the dripping 
blood as he ran. As if he did not want his suit soiled or did not 
want to leave a shameful trail of carmine. 

But this attack proved a blessing in disguise for Fanucci. 
The three young men were not murderers, merely tough 
young boys determined to teach him a lesson and stop him 
from scavenging. Fanucci proved himself a murderer. A few 
weeks later the knife-wielder was shot to death and the femilies 
of the other two young men paid an indemnity to Fanucci to 
make him forswear his vengeance. After that the tributes 
became higher and Fanucci became a partner in the neighbour- 
hood gambling games. As for Vito Corleone, it was none of 
his afiair. He forgot about it immediately. 

During World War I, when imported olive oil became 
scarce, Fanucci acquired a part-interest in the Abbandando 
grocery store by supplying it not only with oil, but imported 
Italian salami, hams, and cheeses. He then moved a nephew 
into the store and Vito Corleone found himself out of a job. 

198 



By this time, the second child, Fredetico, had arrived and 
Vito Codeone had four mouths to feed. Up to this time he had 
been a quiet, very contained young man who kept his thoughts 
to himself. The son of the grocery store owner, young Genco 
Abbandando, was his closest friend, and to the surprise of 
both of them, Vito reproached his friend for his father’s deed. 
Genco, flushed with shame, vowed to Vito that he would not 
have to worry about food. That he, Genco, would steal food 
from the grocery to supply his friend’s needs. This offer 
though was sternly refused by Vito as too shameful, a son 
stealing from his father. 

The young Vito, however, felt a cold anger for the dreaded 
Fanucci. He never showed this anger in any way but bided his 
time. He worked in the railroad for a few months and then, 
when the war ended, work became slow and he could earn 
only a few days’ pay a month. Also, most of the foremen were 
Irish and American and abused the workmen in the foulest 
language, which Vito always bore stone-faced as if he did not 
comprehend, though he understood English very well despite 
his accent. 

One evening as Vito was having supper with his family 
there was a knock on the window that led to the open air shaft 
that separated them from the next building. When Vito pulled 
aside the curtain he saw to his astonishment one of the young 
men in the neighbourhood, Peter Clemenza, leaning out from 
a window on the other side of the air shaft. He was extending 
a white shected bundle. 

*Hey,/>^x<7/i,’ Qemenza said. *Hold these for me until 1 ask 
for them. Hurry up.’ Automatically Vito reached over the 
empty space of the air shaft and took the bundle. Qemenza’s 
face was strained and urgent. He was in some soft of trouble 
and Vito’s helping action was instinctive. But when he imtied 
the bundle in his kitchen, there were five oily guns staining the 
white cloth. He put them in his bedroom closet and waited* 
He learned that Qemen 2 a had been taken away by the police. 
They must have been knocking on his door when he handed 
the guns over the air shaft.. 

Vito never said a word to anyone and of course his terrifled 
wife dared not open her lips even in gossip for fear her own 


199 



husband would be sene to prison. Two days later Peter Qe- 
menza reappeared in the neighbourhood and asked Vito 
casually, ‘Do you have my goods still?’ 

Vito nodded. He was in the habit of talking little. Clemenza 
came up to his tenement Hat and was given a glass of wine 
while Vito dug the bundle out of his bedroom closet. 

Clemenza drank his wine, his heavy good-natured face 
alertly watching Vito. ‘Did you look inside?’ 

Vito, his face impassive, shook his head. ‘I’m not interested 
in things that don’t concern me,’ he said. 

They drank wine together the rest of the evening. They 
found each other congenial. Qemenza was a storyteller; Vito 
Corleone was a listener to storytellers. They became casual 
friends. 

A few days later Qemenza asked the wife of Vito Corleone 
if she would like a fine rug for her living room floor. He took 
Vito with him to help carry the rug. 

Qemenza led Vito to an apartment house with two marble 
pillars and a white marble stoop. He used a key to open the 
door and they were inside a plush apartment. Qemenza 
grunted, ‘ Go on the other side of the room and help me roll it 
up.’ 

The rug was a rich red wool. Vito Corleone was astonished 
by Qemenza’s generosity. Together they roUed the rug into a 
pile and Qemenza took one end while Vito took the other. 
They lifted it and started carrying it towards the door. 

At that moment the apartment bell rang. Qemenza imme- 
diately dropped the rug and strode to the window. He pulled 
the drape aside slightly and what he saw made him draw a gun 
from inside his jacket. It was only at that moment the aston- 
ished 'Vito Corleone realized that they were stealing the rug 
firom some stranger’s apartment. 

The apartment bell rang again. Vito went up alongside 
Qemenza so that he too could see what was happening. At the 
door was a uniformed policeman. As they watched, the police- 
man gave the doorbell a final push, then shrugged and walked 
away down the marble steps and down the street. 

Qemenza grunted in a satisfied way and said, ‘Come on, let’s 
go.’ He picked up his end of the rug and Vito picked up the 


200 



other end. The policeman had barely turned the corner before 
they were edging out the hea'vy oaken door and into the street 
with the rug between them- Thirty minutes later they were 
cutting the rug to fit the living room of Vito Corleone^s apart- 
ment. They had enough left over for the bedroom. Qemenaa 
was an expert workman and from the poclcets of his wide, ill- 
fitting jacket (even then he liked to wear loose clothes though 
he was not so fat), he had the necessary carpet-cutting tools. 

Time went on, things did not improve. The Corleone funily 
could not eat the beautiful rug. Very well, there was no work, 
his wife and childreo must starve. Vito took some parcels of 
food from his friend Genco while he thought things out. 
Finally he was approached by Qemenza and Tessio, another 
young tough of the neighbourhood. They were men who 
thought well of him, the way he carried himself, and they 
knew he was desperate. They proposed to him that he become 
one of their gang which specialized in hijacking trucks of silk 
dresses after those trucks were loaded up at the fiictory on 3 ist 
Street. There was no risk. The truck drivers were sensible 
working-men who at the sight of a gun Hopped on the side- 
walk like angels while the hijackers drove the truck away to be 
unloaded at a friend’s warehouse. Some of the merchandise 
would be sold to an Italian wholesaler, part of the loot would 
be sold door-to-door in th^ Italian neighbourhoods - Arthur 
Avenue in the Bronx, Mulberry Street, and the Chelsea district 
in Manhattan - all to poor Italian families looking for a 
bargain, whose daughters could never be able to afford such 
fine apparel. Clemenza and Tessio needed Vito to drive since 
they knew he chauffeured the Abbandando grocery store de- 
livery truck. In 1919, skilled automobile drivers were at a 
premium. 

Agaiiist his better judgement, Vito Corleone accepted their 
oHer. The dinchmg argument was that he would clear at least a 
thousand dollars for his share of the job. But his young com- 
panions struck him as rash, the planning of the job haphazard, 
the distribution of the loot foolhardy. Their whole approach 
was too careless for his taste. But lie thought them of good, 
sound character. Peter Qemenza, already burly, inspired a 
certain trust, and the lean saturnine Tessio inspir^ confidence. 


aoi 



The job itself went off without a hitch. Vito Cotleone felt no 
fear» much to his astonishment, when his two comrades flashed 
guns and made the driver get out of the silk truck. He was also 
impressed with the coolness of Qemenza and Tessio. They 
didn’t get excited but joked with the driver, told him if he was 
a good lad they’d send his wife a few dresses. Because Vito 
thought it stupid to peddle dresses himself and so gave his 
whole share of stock to the fence, he made only seven hundred 
dollars. But this was a considerable sum of money in 1919. 

The next day on the street, Vito Corleone was stopped by 
the cream-suited, white-fedoraed Fanned. Fanned was a 
brutal-looking man and he had done nothing to disguise the 
circular scar that stretched in a white semicircle from ear to 
ear, looping under his chin. He had heavy black brows and 
coarse features which, when he smiled, were in some odd way 
amiable. 

He spoke with a very thick Sicilian accent. *Ah, young 
fellow,’ he said to Vito. ‘People tell me you’re rich. You and 
your two friends. But don’t you think you’ve treated me a little 
shabbily? After all, this is my neighbourhood and you should 
let me wet my beak.’ He used the Sicilian phrase of the Mafia, 
‘ Fart vagnari a Pi!(zu means the beak of any small bird 

such as a canary. The phrase itself was a demand for part of the 
loot. 

As was his habit, Vito Corleone did not answer. He under- 
stood the implication immediately and was waiting for a 
definite demand. 

Fanned smiled at him, showing gold teeth and stretching 
his noose-like scar tight around his face. He mopped his face 
with a handkerchief and unbuttoned his jacket for a moment as 
if to cool himself but really to show the gun he carried stuck 
in the waistband of his comfortably wide trousers. Then he 
sighed and said, ‘ &ive me five hundred dollars and I’ll forget 
the insult. After all, young people don’t know the courtesies 
due a man like myself.’ 

Vito Corleone smiled at him and even as a young man sdll 
unblooded, there was something so chilling in his smile that 
Fanued hesitated a moment before going on. ‘Otherwise the 
police will come to see you, your and children will be 


20s 



fthamed and destitute. Of course if my information as to your 
gains is incorrect I’ll dip my beak just a little. But no less than 
three hundred dollars. And don’t try to deceive me.’ 

For the £rst time Vito Corleone spoke. His voice was 
reasonable^ showed no anger. It was courteous, as befitted a 
young man speaking to an older man of Fanucci’s eminence. 
He said softly, *My two friends have my share of the money. 
I’ll have to speak to them.’ 

Fanucci was reassured. * You can tell your two friends that I 
expect them to let me wet my beak in the same manner. Don’t 
be afraid to tell them,’ he added reassuringly. Xlememsa and I 
know each other well, he understands these things. Let your- 
self be guided by him. He has more experience in these 
matters.’ 

Vito Corleone shrugged. He tried to look a litde embar- 
rassed. ^Of course,’ he said. ‘You understand this is all new to 
me. Thank you for speaking to me as a godfather.’ 

Fanucci was impressed. ‘You’re a good fellow,’ he said.. He 
took Vito’s hand and clasped it in both of his hairy ones. * You 
have respect,’ he said. ‘A fine thing in the young. Next time 
speak to me first, eh? Perhaps I can help you in your plans.’ 

In later years Vito Corleone understood tbat what had 
made him act in such a perfect, tactical way with Fanucci was 
the death of his own hot-tempered father who had been 
killed by the Mafia in Sicily. But at that time all he felt was an 
icy rage that this man planned to rob him of the money he had 
risked his life and freedom to earn. He had not been afraid. 
Indeed he thought, at that moment, that Fanucci was a cra2y 
fool. From what he had seen of Qemenxa, that burly Sicilian 
would sooner give up his life than a penny of hi^ loot. After 
all, Qemenza had been ready to kill a policeman merely to 
steal a rug. And the slender Tessio had the deadly air of a 
viper. 

But later that night, in Qemenza’s tenement apartment 
across the air shaft, Vito Corleone received another lesson in 
the education he had just begun. Clemenza cursed, Tessio 
scowled, but then both men started talking about whether 
Fanucci would be satisfied with two hundred dollars. Tessio 
thought he might. 


203 



Gemenza was positive. that scarface bastard must have 
found out what we made from the wholesaler who bought 
the dresses. Fanucci won’t take a dime less than three hundred 
dollars. We’ll have to pay.’ 

Vito was astonished but was careful not to show his aston- 
ishment. ‘Why do we have to pay him? What can he do to the 
three of us? We’re stronger than him. We have guns. Why do 
we have to hand over the money we earned?* 

Gemenza explained patiently. ‘Fanucci has friends, real 
brutes. He has connexions with the police. He’d like us' to tell 
him our plans because he could set us up for the cops and earn 
their gratitude. 'Ihcn they would owe him a favour. That’s 
how he operates. And he has a licence from Maranzalla him- 
self to work this neighbourhood.’ Maranzalla was a gangster 
often in the newspapers, reputed to be the leader of a criminal 
ring specializing in extortion, gambling, and armed robbery. 

Gemenza served wine that he had made himself. His wife, 
after putting a plate of salami, olives, and a loaf of Italian bread 
on the table, went down to sit with her women cronies in 
front of the building, carrying her chair with her. She was a 
young Italian girl only a few years in the country and did not 
yet understand English. 

Vito Corleone sat with his two friends and drank wine. He 
had never used his intelligence before as he was using it now. 
He was surprised at how clearly he could think. He recalled 
everything he knew about Fanucci. He remembered the day 
the man had had his throat cut and had run down the street 
holding his fedora under his chin to catch the dripping blood. 
He remembered the murder of the man who had wielded the 
knife and the other two having their sentences removed by 
paying ati indemnity. And suddenly he was sure that Fanucci 
had no great connexions, could not possibly have. Not a man 
who informed to the police. Not a man who allowed his ven- 
geance to be bought off. A real mafioso chief would have had 
the other two men killed also. No, Fanucci had got lucky and 
killed one man but had known he could not kill the other two 
after they were alerted. And so he had allowed himself to be 
paid. It was the personal brutal force of the man that allowed 
him to levy tribute on the shopkeepers, the gambling games 


204 



that ran in the tenement apartments. But Vito Corleone knew 
of at least one gambling game that had never paid Fanucci 
tributes and nothing had ever happened to the man running it. 

And so it was Fanucci alone. Or Fanucci with some gunmen 
hired for special jobs on a strictly cash basis. Which left Vito 
Corleone with another decision. The course his own life must 
take* 

It was from this experience came his oft-repeated belief that 
every tnan has but one destiny. On that night he could have 
paid Fanucci the tribute and have become again a grocery clerk 
with perhaps his own grocery store in the years to come. But 
destiny had decided that he was to become a Don and had 
brought Fanucci to him to^et him on bis destined path. 

Wlien they finished the bottle of wine, Vito said cautiously 
to Clemeoza and Tessio, *If you like, why not give me two 
hundred dollars each to pay to Fanucci? I guarantee he will 
accept that amount from me. Then leave everything in my 
hands. I’ll settle this problem zo your satisfaction.* 

At once Qemenza’s eyes gleamed with suspicion. Vito said 
to him coldly, ‘I never lie to people I have accepted as my 
ftiends. Speak to Fanucci yourself tomorrow. Let him ask you 
for the money. But don’t pay him. And don’t in any way 
quarrel with him. Tell him you have to get the money and will 
give it to me to give him. Let him understand that you are 
willing to pay what he asks. Don’t bargain. I’ll quarrel over 
the price with him. There’s no point making him angry with 
us if he’s as dangerous a man as you say he is.’ 

They left it at that. The next day Qemenza spoke with 
Fanucci to make sure that Vito was not making up the story. 
Then Qemenxa came to Vito’s apartment and gave him the 
two hundred dollars. He peered at Vito Codeohe and said, 
*Fanuccd told me nothing below three hundred dollars, how 
will you make him take less?’ 

Vito Corleone said reasonably, * Surely that’s no concern of 
yours. Just remember that I’ve done you a service.’ 

Tessio came later. Tessio was more reserved than Qcmenaa, 
sharper, more clever but with less force. He sensed something 
amiss, something not quite right. He was a little worried. He 
said to Vito Corleone, * Watch yourself with that bastard of a 


205 



Black Hand, he’s tdcky as a pnest. Do you 'want me to be here 
when you hand him the money, as a witness?’ 

Vito Corleone shook his head. He didn’t even bother to 
answer. He merely said to Tcssio, ‘Tell Fanucci I’ll pay him 
the money here in my house at nine o’clock tonight. I’ll have 
to give him a glass of wine and talk, reason with him to take 
the lesser sum.’ 

Tessio shook his head. * You won’t have much luck. Fanucci 
never retreats.* 

*1*11 reason with him,* Vito Corleone said. It was to become 
a famous phrase in the years to come. It was to become the 
warning rattle before a deadly strike.iWhen he became a Don 
and asked opponents to sit down and reason with him, they 
understood it was the last chance to resolve an afiair without 
bloodshed and murder. 

Vito Corleone told his wife to take the two children. Sonny 
and Fredo, down into the street after supper and on no 
account to let them come up to the house until he gave her 
permission. She was to sit on guard at the tenement door. He 
had some private business with Fanucci that could not be in- 
terrupted. He saw the look of fear on her face and was angry. 
He said to her quiedy, *Do you think you’ve married a fool?’ 
She didn’t answer. She did not answer because she was 
frightened, not of Fanucci now, but of her husband. He was 
changing visibly before her eyes, hour by hour, into a man 
who radiated some dangerous force. He had always been quiet, 
speaking litde, but always gende, always reasonable, which 
was extraordinary in a young Sicilian male. What she was 
seeing was the shedding of his protective coloradon of a harm- 
less nobody now that he was ready to start on his destiny. He 
had sftarted late, he was twenty-five years old, but he was to 
start with a flourish. 

Vito Corleone had decided to murder Fanucci. By doing so 
he would have an extra seven hundred dollars in his bankroll. 
The three hundred dollars he himself would have to pay the 
Black Hand terrorist and the two hundred dollars from Tessio 
and the two himdred dollars from Qemenza. If he did not kill 
Fanucci, he would have to pay the man seven hundred dollars 
cold cash. Fanucci alive was not worth seven hundred doUars 


206 



to him. He would not pay seven hundred dollars to keep 
Fanned alive. If Fanned needed seven himdred dollars for an 
operation to save his life, he would not give Fanned seven 
hundred dollars for the surgeon. He owed Fanued no personal 
debt of gratitude, they were not blood relatives, he did not 
love Fanued. Whyfore, then, should he give Fanned seven 
hundred dollars? 

And it followed inevitably, that since Fanucci wished to take 
seven hundred dollars from him by force, why should he not 
kill Fanned? Surely the world could do without such a person. 

There were of course some practical reasons. Fanued might 
indeed have powerful friends who would seek vengeance. 
Fanucci himself was a dangerous man, not so easily killed. 
There were the police and the electric chair. But Vito Corleone 
had lived under a sentence of death since the murder of his 
father. As a boy of twelve he had fled his executioners and 
crossed the ocean into a strange land, taking a strange name. 
And years of quiet observation had convinced him that he had 
more intelligence and more courage than other men, though 
he had never had the opportunity to use that intelligence and 
courage. 

And yet he hesitated before taking that first step towards his 
destiny. He even packed the seven hundred dollars in a single 
fold of bills and put the money in a convenient side pocket of 
his trousers. But he put the money in the left side of his 
trousers. In the right-hand pocket he put the gun Qememsa 
had given him to use in the hijacking of the silk truck. 

Fanucci came promptly at nine in the evening. Vito Corleone 
set out a jug of homemade wine that Clemenaa had given him. 

Fanucci put his white fedora on the table beside the jug of 
wine. He i^oosened his broad multiflowered tie, its tomato 
stains camouflaged by the bright patterns. The summer night 
was hot, the gaslight feeble. It was very quiet in the apartment. 
But Vito Corleone was icy. To show his good faith he handed 
over the roll of bills and watched carefully as Fanucci, after 
coimting it, took out a wide leather wallet and stuffed the 
money inside. Fanucci sipped his glass of wine and said, * You 
still owe me two hundred doUai^.’ His heavy-browed face was 
CKpressiooiess. 


aoy 



Vito Corleone said in his cool reasonable voice, *I*m a litdc 
short. I’ve been out of work. Let me owe you the money for a 
few weeks.* 

This was a permissible gambit. Fanucd had the bulk of the 
money and would wait.. He might even be persuaded to take 
nothing more or to wait a little longer. He chuckled over iiis 
wine and said, ‘Ah, you’re a sharp young fellow. How is it I’ve 
never noticed you before? You’re too quiet a chap for your 
own interest. I could find some work for you to do that would 
be very profitable.* 

Vito Corleone showed his interest with a polite nod and 
filled up the man’s glass from the purple jug. But Fanucci 
thought better of what he was going to say and rose from liis 
chair and shook Vito’s hand. ‘Goodnight, young fellow,’ he 
said. ‘No hard feelings, eh? If 1 can ever do you a service let 
me know. You've done a good job for yourself tonight.’ 

Vito let Fanucci go down the stairs and out the building. 
The street was thronged with witnesses to show that he had 
left the Corleone home safely. Vito watched from the window. 
He saw Fanucci turn the comer towards Eleventh Avenue and 
knew he was headed towards his apartment, probably to put away 
his loot before coming out on the streets again. Perhaps to put 
away his gun. Vito Corleone left his apartment and ran up the 
stairs to the roof. He travelled over the square block of roofs 
and descended down the steps of an empty loft building fire 
escape that left him in the back yard. He kicked the back door 
open and went through the front door. Across the street was 
Fanucci’s tenement apartment house. 

The viUage of tenements extended only as fiu: west as Tenth 
Avenue. Eleventh Avenue was mostly warehouses ^d lofts 
rented by firms who shipped by New York Central Railroad 
and wanted access to the ficight yards that honeycombed the 
area from Eleventh Avenue to the Hudson River. Fanucci’s 
apartment house was one of the few left standing in this 
wilderness and was occupied mostly by bachelor trainmen, 
yard workers, and the cheapest prostitutes. These people did 
not sit in the street and gossip like honest Indians, they sat in 
beer taverns guzzling their pay. So Vito Corleone found it an 
easy matter to slip across the deserted Eleventh Avenue and 

2o8 



into the vestibule of Fanucd’s apartment house. There he 
drew the gun he had never fired and waited for Fanned. 

He watched through the glass door of the vestibule, know- 
ing Fanucci would come down from Tenth Avenue. Qemenaa 
had showed him the safety on the gun and he had triggered it 
empty- But as a young boy in Sicily at the early age of nine, he 
had often gone hunting with his father, had often fired the 
heavy shotgun called the lupara. It was his skill with the lupara 
even as a small boy that had brought the s<:ntence of death 
upon him by his father’s murderers. 

Now waiting in the darkened hallway, he saw the white blob 
of Fanucci crossing the street towards the doorway. Vito 
stepped back, shoulders pressed against the inner door that led 
to the stairs. He held his gun out to fire. His extended hand 
was only two paces from the outside door. The door swung 
in. Fanucci, white, broad, smelly, jfilled the square of light. 
Vito Corleonc fired. 

The opened door let some of the sound escape into the 
street, the rest of the gun’s explosion shook the building. 
Fanucci was holding on to the sides of the door, trying to stand 
erect, trying to reach for his gun. The force of his struggle had 
torn the buttons off his jacket and made it swing loose. His gun 
was exposed but so was a spidery vein of red on the white 
shirtfront of his stomach. Very carefully, as if he were plung- 
ing a needle into a vein, Vito Corleone fired his second bullet 
into that red web. 

Fanucci fell to his knees, propping the door op^n. He let out 
a terrible groan, the groan of a man in great physical distress 
that was almost comical. He kept giving these groans; Vito 
remembered hearing at least three of them before 4ie put the 
gun against Fanucci’s sweaty, suety cheek and fired into his 
brain. No mote than five seconds had passed when Fanucci 
slumped into death, jamming the door open with his body. 

Very carefully Vito took the wide wallet out of the dead 
man’s jacket pocket and put it inside his shirt. Then he walked 
across the street into the loft building, through that into the 
yard and climbed the fire escape to the roof. From there he 
surveyed the street. Fanucci’s body was still lying in the door- 
way but there was no sign of any other person. Two windows 


209 



had gone up in the tenement and he could see dark heads 
poked out but since he could not see their features they had 
certainly not seen his. And such men would not give informa- 
tion to the police. Fanucci might lie there until dawn or until a 
patrolman making the rounds stumbled on his body. No per- 
son in that house would deliberately expose himseh to police 
suspicion or questioning. They would lock their doors and 
pretend they had heard nothing. 

He could take his time. He travelled over the rooftops to his 
own roof door and down to his own flat. He unlocked the 
door, went inside and then locked the door behind him. He 
rifled the dead man's wallet. Besides the seven hundred dollars 
he had given Fanucci there were only some singles and a five- 
doUar note. 

Tucked inside the flap was an old five-dollar gold piece, 
probably a luck token. If Fanucci was a rich gangster, he 
certainly did not carry his wealth with him. This confirmed 
some of Vito’s suspicions. 

He knew he had to get rid of the wallet and the gun (know- 
ing enough even then that he must leave the gold piece in the 
wallet). He went up on the roof again and travelled over a few 
ledges. He threw the wallet down one air shaft and then he 
emptied the gun of bullets and smashed its barrel against the 
roof ledge. The barrel wouldn’t break. He reversed it in his 
hand and smashed the butt against the side of a chimney. The 
butt split into two halves. He smashed it again and the pistol 
broke into barrel and handle, two separate pieces. He used 
a separate air shaft for each. They made no sound when 
they struck the earth five storeys below, but sank into the soft 
hill of garbage that had accumulated there. In the morn- 
ing more garbage would be thrown out of the windows and, 
with luck, would cover everything. Vito returned to his apart- 
ment. 

He was trembling a little but wa» absolutely under control. 
He changed his clothes and fearful that some blood might have 
splattered on them, he threw them into a metal tub his wife 
used for washing. He took lye and heavy brown laundry soap 
to soak the clothes and scrubbed them with the metal wash 
board beneath the sink. Then he scoured tub and sink with lye 


210 



and soap. He found a bundle of newly-washed clothes in the 
comer of the bedroom and mingled his own clothes with these. 
Then he put on a fresh shirt and trousers and went down to 
join his wife and children and neighbours in front of the 
tenement. 

All these precautions proved to be unnecessary. The police, 
after discovering the dead body at dawn, never questioned 
Vito Corleone. Indeed he was astonished that they never 
learned about Fairucd’s visit to his home on the night he was 
shot to death. He had counted on that for an alibi, Fanucci 
leaving the tenement alive. He only learned later that the 
police had been delighted with the murder of Fanucci and not 
too anxious to pursue his killers. They had assumed it was 
another gang execution, and had questioned hoodlums with 
records in the rackets and a history of strong-arm. Since Vito 
had never been in trouble he never came into the picture. 

But if he had outwitted the police, his partners were another 
matter. Pete Clemenra and Tessio avoided him for the next 
week, for the next two weeks, then they came to call on him 
one evening. They came with obvious respect. Vito Corleone 
greeted them with impassive courtesy and served them wine. 

Qemenza spoke first. He said softly, ‘Nobody is collecting 
from the store owners on Ninth Avenue, Nobody is collecting 
from the card games and gambling in the neighbourhood.* 

Vito Corleone gaxed at both men steadily but did not reply. 
Tessio spoke. ‘We could take over Fanucci’s customers. TTaey 
would pay us.' 

Vito Corleone shrugged. ‘Why come to me? I have no 
interest in such things.’ 

Qemenxa laughed. Even in his youth, before growing his 
enormous belly, he had a fat man's laugh. He said now to Vito 
Corleone, ‘How about that gun I gave you for the truck job? 
Since you won’t need it any more you can give it back to me.' 

Very slowly and deliberately Vito Corleone took a wad of 
bills out of his side pocket and peeled off five tens. ‘Here, I'll 
pay you. I threw the gun away after the truck job.' He smiled 
at the two men. 

At that time Vito Corleone did not know the effect of this 
smile. It was chilling because it attempted no menace. He 


2II 



smiled as if it was some private joke only he himself could 
appreciate. But since he smiled in that fashion only in affairs 
that were lethal, and since the joke was not really private, and 
since his eyes did not smile, ami since his outward character 
was usually so reasonable and quiet, the sudden unmasking of 
his true self was frightening. 

Clemenza shook his head. don’t want the money,’ he said. 
Vito pocketed the bills. He waited. They all understood each 
other. They knew he had killed Fanucci and though they 
never spoke about it to anyone the whole neighbourhood, 
within a few weeks, also knew. Vito Corleone was treated as a 
*man of respect’ by everyone. But he made no attempt to take 
over the Fanucci rackets and tributes. 

What followed then was inevitable. One night Vito’s wife 
brought a neighbour, a widow, to the flat. The woman was 
Italian and of unimpeacheable character. She worked hard to 
keep a home for her fatherless children. Her sixtecn-y ear-old 
son brought home his pay envelope sealed, to hand over to her 
in the old-country style; her scventeen-year-old daughter, a 
dressmaker, did the same. The whole family sewed buttons on 
cards at night at slave labour piece rates. The woman’s name 
was Signora Colombo. 

Vito Corleonc’s wife said, ‘The Signora has a favour to ask 
of you. She is having some trouble.’ 

Vito Corleone expected to be asked for money, which he 
was ready to give. But it seemed that Mrs Colombo owned a 
dog which her youngest son adored. The landlord had 
received complaints on the dog barking at night and had told 
Mrs Colombo to get rid of it. She had pretended to do so. The 
landlord had found out that she had deceived him and had 
ordered her to vacate her apartment. She had promised this 
time to truly get rid of the dog and she had done so. But the 
landlord was so angry that he would not revoke his order. She 
had to get out or the police would be summoned to put her 
out. And her poor little boy bad cried so when they had given 
the dog away to relatives who lived in Long Island. All for 
nothing, they would lose their home. 

Vito Q>rleone asked her gendy, 'Why do you ask me to help 
you?’ 


211 



Mrs Colombo nodded towards his wife. * She told me to ask 
you/ 

He was siurprised. His wife had never questioned him about 
the clothes he had washed the night he had murdered Fanucci. 
Had never asked him where all the money came from when he 
was not working. Even now her face was impassive. Vito said 
to Mrs Colombo, ‘I can give you some money to help you 
move, is that what you want?* 

The woman shook her head, she was in tears. ‘All my friends 
are here, all the girls I grew up with in Italy. How can I move 
to another neighbourhood with strangers? 1 want you to 
speak to the landlord to let me stay.* 

Vito nodded. ‘It’s done then. You won’t have to move. I’ll 
speak to him tomorrow morning.* 

His wife gave him a smile which he did not acknowledge, 
but he felt pleased. Mrs Colombo looked a little uncertain. 
‘You’re sure he’ll say yes, the iat dlord?* she asked. 

* Signor Roberto?’ Vito said in a surprised voice. ‘Of course 
he will. He’s a good-hearted fellow. Once I explain how things 
are with you he’ll take pity on your misfortunes. Now don’t let 
it trouble you any more. Don’t get so upset. Guard your 
health, for the sake of your children.’ 

The landlord, Mr Roberto, came to the neighbourhood 
every day to check on the row of five tenements that he owned. 
He was a padrone^ a man who sold Italian labourers just off the 
boat to the big corporations. With his profits he had bought 
the tenements one by one. An educated man from the North of 
Italy, he felt only contempt for these illiterate Southerners 
from Sicily and Naples who swarmed like vermin through his 
buildings, who threw garbage down the air shafts, who let 
cockroaches and rats eat away his walls without lifting a hand 
to preserve his property. He was not a bad man, he was a good 
husband and father, but constant worry about his investments, 
about the money he earned, about the inevitable expenses that 
came with being a man of property had worn his nerves to a 
frazzle so that he was in a constant state of irritation. When 
Vito Corleone stopped him on the street to ask for a word, Mr 
Roberto was brusque. Not rude, since any one of these 


213 



Southerners might stick a knife into you if rubbed the wrong 
way, though this young man looked like a quiet fellow. 

‘ Signor Roberto,' said Vito Corleone, ‘the friend of my wife, 
a poor widow with no man to protect her, tells me that for 
some reason she has been ordered to move from her apart- 
ment in your building. She is in despair. She has no money, she 
has no friends except those that live here. I told her that I 
would speak to you, that you are a reasonable man who acted 
out of some misunderstanding. She has got rid of the animal 
that caused all the trouble and so why shouldn’t she stay? As 
one Italian to another, I ask you the favour.’ 

Signor Roberto studied the young man in front of him. He 
saw a man of medium stature but strongly built, a peasant but 
not a bandit, though he so laughably dared to call himself an 
Italian. Roberto shrugged. ‘1 have already rented the apart- 
ment to another family for higher rent,’ he said. ‘I cannot dis- 
appoint them for the sake of your friend.’ 

Vito Corleone nodded in agreeable understanding. ‘How 
much more a month?’ he asked. 

‘Five dollars,’ Mr Roberto said. This was a lie. The railway 
flat, four dark rooms, rented for twelve dollars a month to the 
widow and he had not been able to get more than that from the 
new tenant. 

Vito Cqrleone took a roll of bills out of his pocket and 
peeled ofi* three tens. ‘Here is the six months’ increase in ad- 
vance. You needn’t speak to her about it, she’s a proud 
woman. See me again in another six months. But of course 
you’ll let her keep her dog.’ 

‘Like hell,’ Mr Roberto said. ‘And who the hell are you to 
give me orders. Watch your manners or you’ll be out on your 
Sicilian ass in the street there.’ 

Vito Corleone raised his hands in surprise. *l’m asking you 
a favour, only that. One never knows when one might ne^ a 
friend, isn’t that true? Here, take this money as a sign of my 
goodwill and make your own decision. I wouldn’t dare to 
quarrel with it.’ He thrust the money into Mr Roberto’s hand. 
‘ Do me this little favour, just take the money and think things 
over. Tomorrow morning if you want to give me the money 
back by all means do so. If you want the woman out of your 


214 



house, how can I stop you? It*s your property, after fill. If you 
don’t want the dog in there, 1 can understand. I dislike 
animals myself.’ He patted Mr Roberto on the shoulder. ‘Do 
me this service, eh? I won’t forget it. Ask your friends in the 
neighbourhood about me, they’ll tell you Fm a man who 
believes in showing his gratitude.’ 

But of course Mr Roberto had already begun to understand. 
That evening he made inquiries about Vito Corleone. He did 
not wait until the next morning. He knocked on the Corleone 
door that very night, apologmng for the lateness of the hour 
and accepted a glass of wine from Signora Corleone. He 
assured Vito Corleone that it had all been a dreadful misunder- 
standing, that of course Signora Colombo could remain in the 
flat, of course she could keep her dog. Who were those 
miserable tenants to complain about noise from a poor 
animal when they paid such a low rent? At the finish he t^ew 
the thirty dollars Vito Corleone had given him on the table 
and said in the most sincere fashion, ‘Your good heart in 
helping this poor widow has shamed me and I wish to show 
that I, too, have some Christian charity* Her rent will remain 
what it was.’ 

AH concerned played this comedy prettily. Vito poured 
wine, called for cakes, wrung Mr Roberto’s hand and praised 
his warm heart. Mr Roberto sighed and said that having made 
the acquaintance of such a man as Vito Corleone restored his 
fidth in human nature. Finally they tore themselves away from 
each other. Mr Roberto, his bones turned to jelly with fear at 
his narrow escape, caught the streetcar to his home in the 
Bronx and took to his bed. He did not reappear in his tene- 
ments for three days. 

* 

Vito Corleone was now a ‘man of respect ’ in the neighbour- 
hood. He was reputed to be a member of the Mafia of Sicily. 
One day a man who ran card games in a furnished room came 
to bitn s^id voluntarily paid him twenty dollars each week for 
his ‘friendship’. He h^ only to visit the game once or twice a 
week to let the players understand they were under his protec- 
tion. 

Store owners who had problems with young hoodlums 



asked him to intercede. He did so and was properlyre warded. 
Soon be had the enormous income for that time and place of 
one hundred dollars a week. Since Qemenaa and Tessio were 
his friends, his allies, he had to give them each part of the 
money, but this he did without being asked. Finally he decided 
to go into the olive oil importing business with his boyhood 
chum, Genco Abbandando. Genco would handle the business^ 
the importing of the olive oil from Italy, the buying at the 
proper price, the storing in his father’s warehouse. Genco had 
the experience for this part of the business. Qemenza and 
Tessio would be the salesmen. They would go to every Italian 
grocery store in Manhattan, then Brooklyn, then the Bronx, to 
persuade store owners to stock Genco Pura olive oil. (With 
typical modesty, Vito Corleone refused to name the brand 
after himself.) Vito of coxirse would be the head of the firm 
since he was supplying most of the capital. He also would be 
called in on special cases, where store owners resisted the sales 
talks of Clemenxa and Tessio. Then Vito Corleone would use 
his own formidable powers of persuasion. 

For the next few years Vito Corleone lived that completely 
satisfying life of a smill businessman wholly devoted to build- 
ing up his commercial enterprise in a d 3 rnamic, expanding 
economy. He was a devoted &ther and husband but so busy 
be could spare his family little of his time. As Genco Pnra olive 
oil grew to become the best-selling imported Italian oil in 
America, his organization mushroomed. Like any good 
businessman he came to understand the benefits of under- 
cutting his rivals in price, barring them from distribution out- 
lets by persuading store owners to stock less of their brands. 
Like any good businessman he aimed at holding a monopoly 
by forcing his rivals to abandon the field or by merging with 
his own company. However, since he had started off relatively 
helpless, economically, since he did not believe in advertising, 
relying on word of mouth, and since if truth be told, his olive 
oil was no better than his competitors’, he could not use the 
common strangleholds of legitimate businessmen. He had to 
rely on the force of his own personality and his reputation as a 
‘man of respect’. 

Even as a young mao, Vito Corleone became known as a 
ai6 



‘man of reasonableness’* He never uttered a threat. He always 
used logic that proved to be irresistible. He always made 
certain that the other fellow got his share of profit. Nobody 
lost. He did this, of course, by obvious means. Like many 
businessmen of genius he learned that free competition was 
wasteful, monopoly efficient. And so he simply set about 
achieving that efficient monopoly. There were some oil 
wholesalers in Brooklyn, men of fiery temper, headstrong, not 
amenable to reason, who refused to see, to recogai2e, the 
vision of Vito Qirleone, even after he had explained every- 
thing to them with the utmost patience and det^. With these 
men Vito Corlcone threw up his hands in despair and sent 
Tessio to Brooklyn to set up a headquarters and solve the 
problem. Warehouses were burned, truckloads of olive-green 
oil were dumped to form lakes in the cobbled waterfront 
streets. One rash man, an arrogant Milanese with more fiuth 
in the police than a saint has in Christ, actually went to the 
authorities with a complaint against his fellow Italians, break- 
ing the ten-century-old law of omtrta. But before the matter 
could progress any further the wholesaler disappeared, never 
to be seen again, leaving behind, deserted, bis devot^ wife 
and three children, who, God be thanked, were fully grown 
and capable of taking over his business and coming to terms 
with the Gmeo Pura Oil Company. 

But great men are not bom great, they grow great, and so k 
was with Vito Corleone. When Prohibition came to pass and 
alcohol forbidden to be sold, Vito Corleone made the final 
step from a quite ordinary, somewhat mthless businessman to 
a great Don in the world of criminal enterprise. It did not 
happen in a day, it did not happen in a year, but byjche end of 
the Prohibition period and the start of the Great Depression, 
Vito Corlcone had become the Godfather, the Don, Don 
Corleone. 

It started casuaUy enough. By this time the Gefuo Ptira Oil 
Company had a fleet of six delivery trucks. Through Qemenza, 
Vito Corleone was approached by a group of Italian boot- 
leggers who smuggl^ alcohol and whisky in from QinaHa 
They needed trucks and deliverymen to distribute 
produce over New York City. They needed deliverymen who 

«7 



were reliable, discreet, and of a certain determination and force. 
They were willing to pay Vito Corleone for his trucks and for 
his men. The fee was so enormous that Vito Corleone cut back 
drastically on his oil business to use the trucks almost ex- 
clusively for the service of the bootlegger-smugglers. This 
despite the fact that these gentlemen had accompanied their 
offer with a silky threat. But even then Vito Corleone was so 
mature a man that he did not take insult at a threat or become 
angry and refuse a profitable offer because of it. He evaluated 
the ^reat, found it lacking in conviction, and lowered his 
opinion of his new partners because they had been so stupid to 
use threats where none were needed. This was useful informa- 
tion to be pondered at its proper time. 

Again he prospered. But, more important, he acquired 
knowledge and contacts and experience. And he piled up good 
deeds as a banker piles up securities. For in the following years 
it became clear that Vito Corleone was not only a man of 
talent but, in his way, a genius. 

He made himself the protector of the Italian families who 
set themselves up as smdl speakeasies in their homes, selling 
whisky at fifteen cents a glass to bachelor labourers. He 
became godfather to Mrs Colombo’s youngest son when the 
lad made his confirmation and gave a handsome present of a 
twenty-dollar gold piece. Meanwhile, since it was inevitable 
that some of his trucks be stopped by the police, Genco 
Abbandando hired a fine lawyer with many contacts in the 
Police Department and the judiciary. A system of payoffs was 
set up and soon the Corleone organization had a sizeable 
‘sheet’, the list of officials entitled to a monthly sum. When 
the lawyer tried to keep this list down, apologizing for the 
expense, Vito Corleone reassured him. ‘No, no,’ he said. ‘Get 
everyone on it even if they can’t help us right now. 1 believe in 
friendship and I am willing to show my friendship first.’ 

As time went by the Corleone empire became larger, more 
trucks were added, the ‘sheet’ grew longer. Also the men 
working directly for Tessio and Clemenza grew in number. 
The whole thing was becoming unwieldy. Finally Vito 
Corleone worked out a system of organization. Pfie gave 
Clemenza and Tessio each the title of Caporeffme^ or captain, 

zi8 



and the men who worked beneath them the rank of soldier. He 
named Genco Abbandando his counsellor, or Consiglicri. He 
put layers of insulation between himself and any operational 
act. When he gave an order it was to Genco or to one of the 
caporeffmes alone. Rarely did he have a witness to any order he 
gave any particular one of them. Then he split Tessio’s group 
and made it responsible for Brooklyn. He also split Tessio ofiF 
from Qemenza and made it clear over the years that he did not 
want the two men to associate even socially except when 
absolutely necessary. He explained this to the more intelligent 
Tessio, who caught his d^ immediately, though Vito ex- 
plained it as a security measure against the law. Tessio under- 
stood that Vito did not want his two caporegimes to have any 
opportunity to conspire against him and he also understood 
there was no ill will involved, merely a tactical precaution. In 
return Vito gave Tessio a free hand in Brooklyn while he kept 
CIcmenza’s Bronx fief very much under his thumb. Clemenza 
was the braver, more reckless, the crueller man despite his out- 
ward jollity, and needed a tighter rein. 

The Great Depression increased the power of Vito Corleone. 
And indeed it was about that time he came to be called Don 
Corleone. Everywhere in the city, honest men begged for 
honest work in vain. Proud men demeaned themselves and 
their families to accept official charity from a contemptuous 
officialdom. But the men of Don Corleone walked the streets 
with their heads held high, their pockets stuffed with silver 
and paper money. With no fear of losing their jobs. And even 
Don Corleone, Aat most modest of men, could not help feel- 
ing a sense of pride. He was taking care of his world, his 
people. He had not failed those who depended oil him and 
gave him the sweat of their brows, risked their freedom and 
their lives in his service. And when an employee of his was 
arrested and sent to prison by some mischance, that unfor- 
tunate man’s family received a living allowance; and not a 
miserly, beggarly, begrudging pittance but the same amount 
the man earned when free. 

This of course was not pure Christian charity. Not his best 
friends would have called Don Corleone a saint from heaven. 
There was some self-interest in this generosity. An employee 


219 



sent to prison knew he had oniy to keep his mouth shut and 
his wife and children would be cared for. He knew that if he 
did not inform to the police a warm welcome would be his 
when he left prison. There would be a party waiting in his 
home, the best of food, homemade ravioli, wine, pastries, 
with all bis friends and relatives gathered to rejoice in his 
freedom. And sometime during the night the Consiglioriy 
Genco Abbandando, or perhaps even the Don himself, would 
drop by to pay his respects to such a stalwart, take a glass of 
wine in his honour, and leave a handsome present of money 
so that he could enjoy a week or two of leisure with his family 
before returning to his daily toil. Such was the infinite sym- 
pathy and understanding of Don Corleone. 

It was at this time that the Don got the idea that he ran his world 
far better than his enemies ran the greater world which con- 
tinually obstructed his path. And this feeling was nurtured by 
the poor people of the neighbourhood who constantly came to 
him for help. To get on the home relief, to get a young boy a 
job or out of jail, to borrow a small sum of money desperately 
needed, to intervene with landlords who against all reason 
demanded rent from jobless tenants. 

Don Vito Corleone helped them all. Not only that, he 
helped them with goodwill, with encouraging words to take 
the bitter sting out of the charity he gave them. It was only 
natural then that when these Italians were puzzled and con- 
fused on who to vote for to represent them in the state legis- 
lature, in the city offices, in the Congress, they should ask the 
advice of their friend Don Corleone, their Godfather. And so 
he became a political power to be consulted by practical party 
chiefs. He consolidated this power with a far-seeing states- 
manlike intelligence; by helping brilliant boys from poor 
Italian families through college, boys who would later 
become lawyers, assistant district attorneys, and even judges. 
He planned for the future of his empire with all the foresight 
of a great national leader. 

The repeal of Prohibition dealt this empire a crippling blow 
but again he had taken his precautions. In 1953 he sent emis- 
saries to the man who controlled all the gambling activities of 
Manhattan, the crap games on the docks, the shylocking that 


220 



went with it as hot dogs go with baseball games, the book- 
making on sports and horses, the illicit gambling houses that 
ran poker games, the policy or numbers racket of Harlem. 
This man’s name was Salvatore Maran2ano and he was one of 
the acknowledged pe^^novanti^ .90 calibres, or big shots of 
the New York underworld. The Corleone emissaries proposed 
to Maranzano an equal partnership beneficial to both partly. 
Vito Corleone with his organization, his police and political 
contacts, could give the Maranzano operations a stout um- 
brella and the new strength to expand into Brooklyn and the 
Bronx. But Maranzano was a short-sighted man and spurned 
the Corleone offer with contempt. The great A 1 Capone was 
Maranzano’s friend and he had his own organization, his own 
men, plus a huge war chest. He would not brook this upstart 
whose reputation was more that of a Parliamentary debator 
than a true mafioso. Maranzano’s refusal touched off the 
great war of 1933 which was to change the whole structure of 
the underworld in New York City. 

At first glance it seemed an uneven match. Salvatore 
Maranzano had a powerful organization with strong en- 
forcers. He had a friendship with Capone in Chicago and could 
call on help in that quarter. He also had a good relationship 
with the Tattaglia Family, which controlled prostitution in the 
city and what there was of the thin drug traffic at that time. He 
also had political contacts with powerful business leaders who 
used his enforcers to terrorize the Jewish unionists in the 
garment centre and the Italian anarchist syndicates in the 
building trades. 

Against this Don Corleone could throw two small but 
superbly organized regimes led by Qemenza and Tessio. His 
political and police contacts were negated by the business 
leaders who would support Maranzano. But in his favour was 
the enemy’s lack of intelligence about his organization. The 
underworld did not know the true strength of his soldiers and 
even were deceived that Tessio in Brooklyn was a separate and 
mdependefit operation. 

And yet despite all this, it was an unequal battle until Vito 
Codeone evened out the odds with one master stroke. 

Maranzano sent a call to Capone for his two best gunmen to 


221 



come to New York to eliminate the upstart. The Corleotie 
Family had friends and intelligence in Chicago who relayed the 
news that the two gunmen were arriving by train, Vito Cor- 
leone dispatched Luca Brasi to take care of them with instruc- 
tions that would liberate the strange man’s most savage 
instincts. 

Brasi and his people, four of them, received the Chicago 
hoods at the railroad station. One of Brasi’s men procured and 
drove a taxicab for the purpose and the station porter carrying 
the bags led the Capone men to this cab. When tliey got in, 
Brasi and another of his men crowded in after them, guns 
ready, and made the two Chicago boys lie on the floor. The 
cab drove to a warehouse near the docks that B^si had 
prepared for them. 

The two Capone men were bound hand and foot and small 
bath towels were stuflFed into their mouths to keep them from 
crying out. 

Then Brasi took an axe from its place against the wall and 
started hacking at one of the Capone men. He chopped the 
man’s feet off, then the legs at the knees, then the thighs where 
they joined the torso. Brasi was an extremely powerful man 
but it took him many swings to accomplish his purpose. By 
that time of course the victim had given up the ghost and the 
floor of the warehouse was slippery with the hacked fragments 
of his flesh and the gouting of his blood. WTien Brasi turned to 
his second victim he found further effort unnecessary. The 
second Capone gunman out of sheer terror had, impossibly, 
swallowed the bath towel in his mouth and suffocated. The 
bath towel was found in the man’s stomach when the police 
performed their autopsy to determine the cause of death. 

X few days later in Qiicago the Capones received a message 
from Vito Corleone. It was to this effect ; ‘ You know now how 
I deal with enemies. Why does a Neapolitan interfere in a 
quarrel between two Sicilians? If you wish me to consider you 
as a friend I owe you a service which I will pay on demand. A 
man like yourself must know how much more profitable it is 
to have a friend who, instead of calling on you £ot help, takes 
care of his own affairs and stands ever ready to help you in 
some future time of trouble. If you do not wish my fidendship, 


22Z 



so be k. But then 1 must tell you that the climate in this city is 
damp; unhealthy for Neapolitans, and you are advised never 
to visit it/ 

The arrogance of this letter was a calculated one. The Don 
held the Capones in small esteem as stupid, obvious cut- 
throats. His intelligence informed him that Capone had for- 
feited all political influence because of his public arrogance and 
the flaunting of his criminal wealth. The Don knew, in fact 
was positive, that without political influence, without the 
camouflage of society, Capone’s world, and others like it, 
could be easily destroyed. He knew Capone was on the path to 
destruction. He also knew that Capone’s influence did not 
extend beyond the boundaries of Qiicago, terrible and all- 
pervading as that influence there might be. 

The tactic was successful. Not so much because of its 
ferocity but because of the chilling swifhiess, the quickness of 
the Don’s reaction. If his intelligence was so good, any further 
moves would be fraught with danger. It was better, ^ wiser, 
to accept the offer of friendship with its implied payofll The 
Capones sent back word that they would not interfere. 

The odds were now equal. And Vito Corleone had earned 
an enormous amount of ‘respect’ throughout the United 
States underworld with his humiliation of the Capones. For 
six months he outgeneralled Maranzano. He raid^ the crap 
games under that man’s protection, located his biggest policy 
banker in Harlem and had him relieved of a day’s play not 
only in money but in records. He engaged his enemies on aU 
fronts. Even in the garment centres he sent Qemenza and his 
men to flght on the side of the unionists against thp enforcers 
on the payroll of Maranzano and the owners of the dress 
firms. And on ail fronts his superior intelligence and organiz- 
ation made him the victor. Clemenza’s jolly ferocity, which 
Corleone employed judiciously, also helped turn the tide of 
battle. And then Don Corleone sent the held-back reserve of 
the Tessio regime after Maranzano himself. 

By this time Maranzano had dispatched emissaries suing for 
a peace. Vito Corleone refused to sec them, put them off on 
one pretext or another. The Maranzano soldiers were deserting 
their leader, not wishing to die in a losing cause. Bookmakers 



»nd sbyiocks were paying the Corlcooe organization their 
protection money. The war was all but over. 

And then finally on New Year's Eve of 1935, Tessio got 
inside the defences of Maranzano himself. The Maranzano 
lieutenants were anxious for a deal and agreed to lead their 
chief to the slaughter. They told him that a meeting had been 
arranged in a Brooklyn restaurant with Corleone and they 
accompanied Maranzano as his bodyguards. They left him 
sitting at a checkered table, morosely munching a piece of 
bread, and Bed the restaurant as Tessio and four of his men 
entered. The execution was swift and sure. Maranzano, his 
mouth fiiU of half-chewed bread, was riddled with bullets. 
The war was over. 

The Maranzano empire was incorporated into the Corleone 
operation. Don Corleone set up a system of tribute, allowing 
all incumbents to remain in their bookmaking and policy 
number spots. As a bonus he had a foothold in the unions of 
the garment centre which in later years was to prove ex- 
tremely important. And now that he had settled his business 
aflEairs the Don found trouble at home. 

Santino Corleone, Sonny, was sixteen years old and grown 
to an astonishing six feet with broad shoulders and a heavy 
face that was sensual but by no means effeminate. But where 
Fredo was a quiet boy, and Michael, of course, a toddler, 
Santino was constantly in trouble. He got into fights, did 
badly in school and, finally, Clemenza, who was the boy's god- 
father and had a duty to speak, came to Don Corleone one 
evening and informed him that his son had taken part in an 
armed robbery, a stupid affair which could have gone very 
badly. Sonny was obviously the ringleader, the two other boys 
in the robbery his followers. 

It was one of the very few times that Vito Corleone lost his 
temper. Tom Hagen had been living in his home for three 
years and he asked Qemenza if the orphan boy had been in- 
volved. Gemenza shook his head. Don Corleone had a car 
sent to bring Santino to his offices^ the Gtneo Pura Olive Oil 
Company. 

For the first time, the Don met defeat. Alone with his son, 
he gave fiiU vent to his rage, cursing the hulking Sonny in 


224 



SidHan dialect, a language so much more satisfying dian any 
other for expressing rage. He ended up with a question. * What 
gave you the right to commit such an act? WiaaLt made you 
wish to commit such an act?* 

Sonny stood there, angry, refusing to answer. The Don said 
with contempt, ‘And so stupid. '^9^t did you cam for that 
night’s work. Fifty dollars each? Twenty dollars ^ You risked 
your life for twenty dollars, eh?’ 

As if he had not heard these last words. Sonny said de- 
fiandy, ‘I saw you kill Fanucci.’ 

The Don said, ‘Ahhh’ and sank back in his chair. He waited. 

Sonny said, ‘When Fanucci left the building. Mama said I 
could go up the house. I saw you go up the roof and I foUowed 
you, I saw everything you did. I stay^ up there and I saw you 
throw away the wallet and the gun.’ 

Thf; Don sighed. * Well, then I can’t talk to you about how 
you sUGuid behave. Don’t you want to finish school, don’t you 
io be a lawyer? Lawyers can steal more money wifo a 
b-a-urc a thousand men with guns and masks.’ 

x - ^^cd at him and said slyly, ‘I want to enter the 
‘ r u When he saw that the Don’s fiicc remained 

he did not laugh at the joke, he added hastily, 
‘ I can icam he w to sell olive oil.* 

Still the Don did not answer. Finally he shrugged. ‘Every 
man has one destiny,’ he said. He did not add that the witnes- 
sing of Fanued’s murder had decided that of his son. He 
merely turned away and added quietly, ‘Come in tomorrow 
morning at nine o’clock. Genco will show you what to do.’ 

But Genco Abbandando, with that shrewd insight that a 
ConsigUori must have, realized the true wish of the Don and 
used Sonny mostly as a bodyguard for his father, a position in 
which he could also learn the subtleties of being a Don. And 
it brought out a professorial instinct in the Don himself, who 
often gave lectures on how to succeed for the benefit of his 
eldest son. 

Besides his oft-repeated theory that a man has hut one 
destiny, the Don constantly reproved Sonny for that young 
man’s outbursts of temper. The Don considered a use of 
threats the most foolish kind of exposure; the of 

«5 


GodMcr- Q 



mgu without foiethooght as the most dangerous iodulgenoe. 
No one had ever heard the Don utter a naked threat, no one 
had ever seen him in an uncontrollable rage. It was unthink- 
able. And so he tried to teach Sonny his own disciplines. He 
claimed that there was no greater natural advantage in life than 
having an enemy overestimate your faults, unless it was to 
have a friend underestimate your virtues. 

The caporegimiy Qemenaa, took Sonny in hand and taught 
him how to shoot and to wield a garrotte. Sonny had no taste 
for the Italian rope, he was too Americanized. He preferred 
the simple, direct, impersonal Anglo-Saxon gun, which 
saddened Qemenza. But Sonny became a constant and wel- 
come companion to his father, driving his car, helping him in 
litde details. For the next two years he seemed like the usual 
son entering his father’s business, not too bright, not too 
eager, content to hold down a soft job. 

Meanwhile his boyhood chum and semi-adopted brother 
Tom Hagen was going to college. Fredo was still in high 
school; Michael, the youngest brother, was in grammar 
school, and baby sister Connie was a toddling girl of four. 
The funHy had long since moved to an apartment house in the 
Bronx. Don Corleone was considering buying a house in 
Long Island, but he wanted to fit this in with other plans he 
was formulating. 

Vito Corleone was a man with vision. All the great cities of 
America were being torn by underworld strife. Guerrilla wars 
by the dozen flared up, ambitious hoodlums trying to carve 
themselves a bit of empire; men like Corleone himself were 
trying to keep their borders and rackets secure. Don Corleone 
saw that the newspapers and government agencies were using 
these killings to get stricter and stricter laws, to use harsher 
police methods. He foresaw that public indignation might 
even lead to a suspension of democratic procedures which 
could be fatal to him and his people. His own empire, inter- 
nally, was secure. He decided to bring peace to all the warring 
factions in New York Qty and then in the nation. 

He had no illusions about the dangerousness of his mission. 
He spent the first year meeting with different chiefs of gangs in 
New York, laying the groundwork, sounding them out, pro- 

226 



podog spheres of influence that would be honoured by a 
loosely bound confederated council. But there were too many 
factions, too many special interests that conflicted. Agree- 
ment was impossible. Like other great rulers and lawgivers in 
history Don Corleone decided that order and peace were im- 
possible until the number of reigning states had been reduced 
to a manageable number.. 

There were flve or six ^Families ’ too powerful to eliminate. 
But the rest, the neighbourhood Black Hand terrorists, the free- 
lance shylocks, the strong-arm bookmakers operating without 
the proper, that is to say paid, protection of the legal authorities, 
would have to go. And so he mounted what was in effect a 
colonial war against these people and threw all the resources of 
the Corleone organization against them. 

The pacifleation of the New York area took three years and 
had some unexpected rewards. At first it took the form of bad 
luck. A group of mad-dog Irish stick-up artists the Don had 
marked for exterminadoo almost carried the day with sheer 
Emerald Isle dan. By chance, and with suicidal bravery, one of 
these Idsh gunmen pierced the Don’s proteedve cordon and 
put a shot into his chest. The assassin was immediately riddled 
with bullets but the damage was done. 

However this gave Sandno Corleone his chance. With his 
frther out of acdon. Sonny took command of a troop, his own 
figiws, with the rank of caportffme, and like a young, un- 
trumpeted Napoleon, showed a genius for dty warfiure. He 
also showed a merciless ruthlessness, the lack of which had 
been Don Corleone’s only fiiult as a conqueror. 

From 1955 to 1937 Sonny Corleone made a reputation as the 
most cunning and relendess execudoner the underworld had 
yet known. Yet for sheer terror even he was eclipsed by the 
awesome man named Luca Brasi. 

It was Brasi who went after the rest of the Irish gunmen and 
single-handedly wiped them out. It was Brasi, operating alone 
when one of the six powerful fiunilies tded to interfere and 
become the protector of the mdq>endent8, who assassinated 
the head of that fiunily as a warning. Shordy afrer, the Don 
recovered from his wound and made peace with that pardcular 



By 1937 peace and harmony reigned in New York City 
except for minor incidents, minor misunderstandings which 
were, of course, sometimes fatal. 

As the rulers of 'ancient cities always kept an anxious eye on 
the barbarian tribes roving around their walls, so Don Cor- 
leone kept an eye on the adairs of the world outside his world. 
He noted the coming of Hitler, the £dl of Spain, Germany’s 
strong-arming of Britain at Munich. Unblinkered by that out- 
side world, he saw clearly the coming global wax and he 
understood the implications. His own world would be more im- 
pregnable than before. Not only that, fortunes could be made 
in time of war by alert, foresighted folk. But to do so peace 
must reign in his domain while war raged in the world outside. 

Don Corleone carried his message through the United 
States. He conferred with compatriots in Los Angeles, San 
Francisco, Qeyeland, Chicago, Philadelphia, Miami, and 
Boston. He was the underworld apostle of peace and, by 1939, 
more successful than any Pope, he had achieved a working 
agreement amongst the most powerful underworld organiaa- 
dons in the country. Like the Consdtudon of the United States 
this agreement respected fully the internal authority of each 
meml^ in his state or city. The agreement covered only 
spheres of influence and an agreement to enforce peace in the 
underworld. 

And so when World War n broke out in 1939, when the 
United States joined the conflict in 1941, the world of Don 
"Vito Corleone was at peace, in order, f^iy prepared to reap the 
golden harvest on equal terms with all the other industries of a 
booming Amenca. The Corleone Family had a hand in sup- 
plying black-market OP A food stamps, gasoline stamps, even 
tiaVd priorities. It could help get war contracts and then help 
get black-market materials for those garment centre clothing 
firms who were not given enough raw material because they 
did not have government contracts. He could even get all the 
young men in his organization, those eligihlc for Army draft, 
excused from fighting in the foreign war. He did this with the 
aid of doctors who advised what drugs had to be taken before 
physical examination, or by placing the men in draft-exempt 
positions in the war industries. 

228 



And 80 the Don could take pride in his rule. His world was 
safe for those who had sworn their loyalty to him; other men 
who believed in law and order were dying by the millions. The 
only dy in the ointment was that his own son, Michael Cor- 
leone, refused to be helped, insisted on volunteering to serve 
his own country. And to the Don^s astonishment, so did a few 
of his other young men in the organization. One of the men, 
trying to explain this to his caporegi^e^ said, "This country has 
been good to me.’ Upon this story being relayed to the Don he 
said angrily to the caporegim^ have been good to him.’ It 
might have gone badly for these people but, as he had excused 
his son Michael, so must he excuse other young men who so 
misunderstood their duty to their Don and to themselves. 

At the end of World War II Don Corleone knew that again 
his world would have to change its ways, that it would have to 
fit itself more snugly into the ways of the other, larger world. 
He believed he could do this with no loss of profit. 

There was reason for this belief in his own experience. What 
had put him on the right track were two personal aflairs. 
Early in his career the then-young Nazorine, only a baker’s 
helper planning to get married, had come to him for assistance. 
He and his future bride, a good Italian girl, had saved their 
money and had paid the enormous sum of thrte hundred 
dollars to a wholesaler of furniture recommended to them. 
This wholesaler had let them pick out everything they wanted 
to furnish their tenement apartment. A fine sturdy bedroom set 
with two bureaux and lamps. Also the living room set of heavy 
stufied sofii and stuffed armchairs, all covered with rich gold- 
threaded fabric. Nazorine and his fianc6e had spent a happy 
day picking out what they wanted from the huge •warehouse 
crowded with furniture. The wholesaler took their money, 
their three hundred dollars wrung from the sweat of their 
blood, and pocketed it and promised the furniture to be de- 
livered within the week to the already rented flat. 

The very next week however, the firm had gone into bank- 
ruptcy. The great warehouse stocked with furniture had been 
sealed shut and attached for payment of creditors. The whole- 
saler had disappeared to give other creditors time to unleash 
their anger on the empty air. Nazorine, one of these, went to 


229 



his kwyer, who told him nothing could be done until the case 
was setded in court and all creditors satisfied. This might take 
three years and Nazorine would be lucky to get back ten cents 
on the dollar. 

Vito Corleone listened to this story with amtised disbelief. 
It was not possible that the law could allow such thievery. The 
wholesaler owned his own palatial home, an estate in Long 
Island, a luxurious automobile, and was sending his children 
to college. How could he keep the three hundred dollars of 
the poor baker Nazorine and not give him the furniture he had 
paid for? But, to make sure, Vito Corleone had Genco 
Abbandando check it out with the lawyers who represented 
the Genco Pura company. 

They verified the story of Nazorine. The wholesaler had all 
his personal wealth in his wife’s name. His furniture business 
was incorporated and he was not personally liable. True, he 
had shown bad faith by taking the money of Nazorine when he 
knew he was going to file bankruptcy but this was a common 
practice. Under law there was nothing to be done. 

Of course the matter was easily adjusted. Don Corleone sent 
his Consiglioriy Genco Abbandando, to speak to the wholesaler, 
and as was to be expected, that wide-awake businessman 
caught the drift immediately and arranged for Nazorine to get 
his furniture. But it was an interesting lesson for the young 
Vito Corleone. 

The second incident had more far-reaching repercussions. 
In 1939, Don Corleone had decided to move his family out of 
the city. Like any other parent he wanted his children to go to 
better schools and mix with better companions. For his own 
personal reasons he wanted the anonymity of suburban life 
where his reputation was not known. He bought the mall 
property in Long Beach, which at that time had only four 
newly built houses but with plenty of room for more. Sonny 
was formally engaged to Sandra and would soon marry, one of 
the houses would be for him. One of the houses was for the 
Don. Another was for Genco Abbandando and his family. 
The other was kept vacant at the time. 

A week after the mall was occupied, a group of three work- 
men came in all innocence with their truck. They claimed to be 


230 



furnace inspectors for the town of Long Beach. One of the 
Don’s young bodyguards let the men in and led them to the 
furnace in the basement. The Don, his wife and Sonny were in 
the garden taking their ease and enjoying the salty sea air. 

Much to the Don’s annoyance he was summoned into the 
house by his bodyguard. The three workmen, all big burly 
fellows, were grouped around the furnace. They had taken it 
apart, it was strewn around the cement basement floor. The 
leader, an authoritative man, said to the Don in a gruff voice, 
‘ Your furnace is in lousy shape. If you want us to fix it and put 
it together again, it’ll cost you one hundred fifty dollars for 
labour and parts and then we’ll pass you for county inspec- 
tion.’ He took out a red paper label. ‘We stamp this seal on it, 
see, then nobody from the county bothers you again.’ 

The Don was amused. It had been a boring, quiet week in 
which he had had to neglect his business to take care of such 
family details moving to a new house entailed. In more broken 
English than his usual slight acc^^nt he asked, ‘If I don’t pay 
you, what happens to my furnace? ’ 

The leader of the three men shrugged. ‘We just leave the 
furnace the way it is now.’ He gestured at the metal parts 
strewn over the floor. 

The Don said meekly, ‘Wait, I’ll get you your money.’ Then 
he went out into the garden and said to Sonny, ‘Listen, there’s 
some men working on the furnace, I don’t understand what 
they want. Go in and take care of the matter.’ It was not 
simply a joke; he was considering making his son his under- 
boss. This was one of the tests a business executive had to 
pass. 

Sonny’s solution did not altogether please his father. It was 
too direct, too lacking in Sicilian subtleness. He was the 
Qub, not the Rapier. For as soon as Sonny heard the leader’s 
demand he held the three men at gunpoint and had them 
thoroughly bastinadoed by the bodyguards. Then he made 
them put the furnace together again and tidy up the basement. 
He searched them and found that they actually were employed 
by a house-improvement firm with headquarters in Suffolk 
County. He learned the name of the man who owned the firm. 
Then he kicked the three men to their truck. ‘ Don’t let me see 



you in l^ong Beach again/ he told them. 'I’ll have your bails 
hanging from your cars.’ 

It was typical of the young Santtno^ before he became older 
and crueller, that he extended his protection to the com- 
munity he lived in. Sonny paid a personal call to the home- 
improvement firm owner and told him not to send any of his 
men into the Long Beach area ever again. As soon as the 
Corlcone Family set up their usual business liaison with the 
local police force they were informed of all such complaints 
and all crimes by professional criminals. In less than a year 
Long Beach became the most crime-free town of its sixe in the 
United States. Professional sdek-up artists and sttong-arms 
received one warning not to piy their trade in the town. They 
were ailow'eci one ohence. V/hen ttiey comm.nred a seconn they 
simply disappeared. The himfi^m home-improvement gyp 
artists, i-he door-lo-door con men were politely warned that 
they were not welcome in Long Beach. Those conhdent con 
men who disregaraed the wanimg were beaten within an mch 
of theii lives. Resident young punks wno iiad no respect for 
law and proper authority were advnsed in the most fatherly 
fashion to run away from borne. j.ong Beaca became a model 
city. 

What impressed the T‘>r»ri was the legal validity of these sales 
swindles. Clearly there was a place for a man of his talents in 
that other world which had been closed to him as an honest 
youth, l ie took appropriate steps to enter that world. 

And so he lived happily on tlie mail in Long Beach, con- 
solidating and enlarging his empire, until after the war was 
over, the Turk Sollozzo broke the peace and plunged the 
Don’s world into its own >var, and brought liim to his hospital 
bed. 



Book IV 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

In the New Hampshire village, every foreign phenomenon 
was properly noticed by housewives peering from windows, 
storekeepers lounging behind their doors. And so when the 
black automobile bearing New York licence plates stopped in 
front of the Adams* home, every citkzen knew about it in a 
matter of minutes. 

Kay Adams, really a small-town girl despite her college 
education, was also peering from her bedroom window. She 
had been studying for her exams and preparing to go down- 
stairs for lunch when she spotted the car coming up the street, 
anci for some reason she was not surprised when it rolled to 
a halt in front of her lawn. Two men got out, big burly men 
who looked like gangsters in the movies to her eyes, and she 
flew down the stairs to be the first at the door. She was sure 
they came from Michael or his family and she didn’t want 
them talking to her father and mother without any introduc- 
tion. It wasn’t that she was ashamed of any of Mike’s friends, 
she thought; it was just that her mother and father were old- 
fiishioned New England Yankees and wouldn’t understand 
her even knowing such people. 

She got to the door just as the bell rang and she called to her 
mother, 'I’ll get it. ’ She opened the door and the two big mai 
stood there. One reached inside his breast pocket like a gang- 
ster reaching for a gun and the move so surprised Kay that she 
let out a little gasp but the man had taken out a sm^ leather 
case which he flapped open to show an identification card. 
‘I’m Detective John Phillips from the New York Police De- 
partment,’ he said. He motioned to the other man, a dark- 
complexioned man with very thick, very black eyebrows. 
‘This is my partner. Detective Siriani. Are you Miss Kay 
Adams?’ 



Kay nodded. Phillips said, ‘May we come in and talk to you 
for a few minutes. It’s about Michael Corlcone.’ 

She stood aside to let them in. At that moment her father 
appeared in the small side hall that led to his study. ‘Kay, what 
is it?’ he asked. 

Her father was a grey-haired, slender, distinguished-looking 
man wlio not only was the pastor of the town Baptist church 
but had a reputation in religious circles as a scholar. Kay really 
didn’t know her father well, he puzzled her, but she knew he 
loved her even if he gave the impression he found her un- 
interesting as a person. Though they had never been close, she 
trusted him. So she said simply, ‘These men are detectives 
from New York. They want to ask me questions about a boy 
I know.’ 

Mr Adams didn’t seem surprised. ‘Why don’t we go into my 
study?’ he said. 

Detective Phillips said gently, *We’d rather talk to your 
daughter alone, Mr Adams.’ 

Mr Adams said courteously, ‘That depends on Kay, I think. 
My dear, would you rather speak to these gentlemen alone or 
would you prefer to have me present? Or perhaps your 
mother?’ 

Kay shook her head. ‘I’ll talk to them alone.’ 

Mr Adams said to Phillips, ‘You can use my study. Will you 
stay for lunch?’ The two men shook their heads. Kay led them 
into the study. 

They rested uncomfortably on the ^dge of the couch as she 
sat in her father’s big leather chair. Detective Phillips opened 
the conversation by saying, ‘Miss Adams, have you seen or 
heard from Michael Corleone at any time in the last three 
wecics?* The one question was enough to warn her. Three 
weeks ago she had read the Boston newspapers with their 
headlines about the killing of a New York police captain and a 
narcotics smuggler named Virgil Sollozzo. The newspaper had 
said it was part of the gang war involving the Corleone Family. 

Kay shook her head. ‘No, the last time 1 saw him he was 
going to see his father in the hospital. That was periiaps a 
month ago/ 

The other detective said in a harsh voice, ‘We know all 

*54 



about that meeting. Have you seen or heard from him since 
then?' 

‘No/ Kay said. 

Detective Phillips said in a polite voice, ‘ If you do have con- 
tact with him we*d like you to let us know. It’s very important 
we get to talk to Michael Corlconc. I must warn you that if 
you do have contact with him you may be getting involved in 
a very dangerous situation. If you help him in any way, you 
may get yourself in very serious trouble.’ 

Kay sat up very straight in the chair. ‘ Why shouldn’t I help 
him?’ she asked. ‘We’re going to be married, married people 
help each other.* 

It was Detective Siriani who answered her. ‘If you help, you 
may be an accessory to murder. We’re looking for your boy- 
friend because he kiUed a police captain in New York plus an 
informer the police officer was contacting. We know Michael 
Corleone is the person who did the shooting.’ 

Kay laughed. Her laughter was so unaffected, so incredulous, 
that the officers were impressed. ‘Mike wouldn’t do anything 
like that,’ she said. ‘He never had anything to do with his 
family. When we went to his sister’s wedding it was obvious 
that he was treated as an outsider, almost as much as I was. If 
he’s hiding now it’s just so that he won’t get any publicity, so 
his name won’t be dragged through all this. Mike is not a 
gangster. I know him better than you or anybody else can 
know him. He is too nice a man to do anything as despicable 
as murder. He is the most law-abiding person 1 know, and I’ve 
never known him to lie..’ 

Detective Phillips asked gently, ‘ How long hav^ you known 
him?’ 

‘Over a year,* Kay said and was surprised when the two 
men smiled. 

‘I think there are a few things you should know,’ Detective 
Phillips said. ‘On the night he left you, he went to the hos- 
pital. When he came out he got into an argument with a police 
captain who had come to the hospital on official business. He 
assaulted that police officer but got the worst of it. In fact he 
got a broken jaw and lost some teeth. His friends took him out 
to the Corleone Family houses at Long Beach. The following 


^55 



night the police captain he had the fight with was gunned 
down and Michael Corleone disappeared. Vanished. We have 
our contacts, our informers. They all point the finger at 
Michael Corleone but we have no evidence for a court of 
law. The waiter who witnessed the shooting doesn’t recognize 
a picture of Mike but he may recognize him in person. And we 
have Sollozzo’s driver, who refuses to talk, but we might 
make him talk if we have Michael Corleone in our hands. So 
we have all our people looking for him, the FBI is looking 
for him, everybody is looking for him. So far, no luck, so we 
thought you might be able to give us a lead.’ 

Kay said coldly, ‘I don’t believe a word of it.’ But she felt a 
bit sick knowing the part about Mike getting his jaw broken 
must be true. Not that that would make Mike commit murder. 

‘Will you let us know if Mike contacts you?’ Phillips asked. 

Kay shook her head. The other detective, Siriani, said 
roughly, ‘We know you two have been shacking up together. 
We have the hotel records and witnesses. If we let that infor- 
mation slip to the newspapers your father and mother would 
feel pretty lousy. Real respectable people like them wouldn’t 
think much of a daughter shacking up with a gangster. If you 
don’t come clean right now I’ll call your old man in here and 
give it to him straight.’ 

Kay looked at him with astonishment. Then she got up and 
went to the door of the study and opened it. She could see her 
father standing at the living-room window, sucking at bis pipe. 
She called out, ‘Dad, can you join us?’ He turned, smiled at 
her, and walked to the study. When he came through the door 
he put his arm around his daughter’s waist and faced the 
detectives and said, ‘Yes, gentlemen?’ 

When they didn’t answer, Kay said coolly to Detective 
Siriani, ‘Give it to him straight, officer.’ 

Siriani flushed. ‘Mr Adams, I’m telling you this for your 
daughter’s good. She is mixed up with a hoodlum we have 
reason to believe committed a murder on a police officer. I’m 
just telHng her she can get into serious trouble unless she co^ 
operates with us. But she doesn’t seem to realize how serious 
this whole matter is. Maybe you can talk to her.’ 

‘That is quite incredible/ Mr Adams said politely. 

Z56 



Siriani Jutted his jaw. * Your daughter and Michael Cotleonc 
have been going out together for over a year. They have 
stayed overnight in hotels together registered as man and wife. 
Michael Q>rleonc is wanted for questioning in the murder of 
a police officer. Your daughter refuses to give us any infor- 
mation that may help us. Those are the facts. You can call 
them incredible but I can back everything up.’ 

*1 don’t doubt your word, sir,’ Mr Adams said gently. 
* What 1 find incredible is that my daughter could be in serious 
trouble. Unless you’re suggesting that she is a ’ - here his face 
became one of scholarly doubt - ‘a “moll”, I believe it’s 
called.’ 

Kay looked at her father in astonishment. She knew he was 
being playful in his donnish way and she was surprised that he 
could take the whole affair so lightly. 

Mr Adams said firmly, ’However, rest assured that if the 
young man shows his face here I shall immediately report his 
presence to the authorities. As will my daughter. Now, if you 
will forgive us, our lunch is growing cold.’ 

He ushered the men out of the house with every courtesy 
and closed the door on their backs gently but firmly. He took 
Kay by the arm and led her towards the kitchen far in the rear of 
the house, ’ Come, my dear, your mother is waiting lunch for us.’ 

By the time they reached the kitchen, Kay was weeping 
silently, out of relief from strain, at her father’s unquestiomng 
affection. In the kitchen her mother took no notice of her weep- 
ing, and Kay realiaed that her father must have told her about 
the two detectives. She sat down at her place and her 
mother served her silently. When all three were at the table 
her father said grace with bowed head. 

Mrs Adams was a short stout woman always neatly dressed, 
hair always set. Kay had never seen her in disarray. Her mother 
too had always been a little disinterested in her, holding her at 
arm’s length. And she did so now. ’Kay, stop bemg so 
dramatic. I’m sure it’s all a great deal of fiiss about nothing 
at all. After aH, the boy was a Dartmouth boy, he couldn’t 
possibly be mheed up in anything so sordid.’ 

Kay looked op in surprise. ’How did you know Mike went 
to Dartmouth 


*37 



Kcr mother said complacently, *You young people are so 
mysterious, you think you’re so clever. We’ve known about 
him all along, but of course we couldn’t bring it up until you 
did.’ 

‘But how did you know?’ Kay asked. She still couldn’t face 
her father now that he knew about her and Mike sleeping 
together. So she didn’t see the smile on his face when he said, 
‘We opened your mail, of course.’ 

Kay was horrified and angry. Now she could face him. What 
he had done was more shameful than her own sin. She could 
never believe it of him. * Father, you didn’t, you couldn’t have.’ 

Mr Adams smiled at her. ‘I debated which was the greater 
sin, opening your mail, or going in ignorance of some hazard 
my only child might be incurring. The choice was simple, and 
virtuous.’ 

Mrs Adams said between mouthfuls of boiled chicken, 
‘After all, my dear, you are terribly innocent for your age. 
We had to be aware. And you never spoke about him.’ 

For the first time Kay was grateful that Michael was never 
affectionate in his letters. She was grateful that her parents 
hadn’t seen some of her letters. ‘I never told you about him 
because I thought you’d be horrified about his family.’ 

‘We were,’ Mr Adams said cheerfully. ‘By the way, has 
Michael got in touch with you?’ 

Kay shook her head. ‘ I don’t believe he’s guilty of anything.* 

She saw her parents exchange a glance over the table. Then 
Mr Adams said gently, ‘If he’s not guilty and he’s vanished, 
then perhaps something else happened to him.’ 

At first Kay didn’t understand. Then she got up from the 
table and ran to her room. 

Three days later Kay Adams got out of a taxi in front of the 
Corleone mall in Long Beach. She had phoned, she was ex- 
pected. Tom Hagen met her at the door and she was disap- 
pointed that it was him. She knew he would tell her nothing. 

In the living ro om he gave her a drink. She had seen a 
couple of other men lounging around the house but not 
Sonny. She asked Tom Hagen directly, ‘Do you know where 
Mike is? Do you know where I can get in touch with him?* 

238 



Hagen said smoothly, ‘ Wc know he’s all right but wc don’t 
know where he is right now. When he heard about that cap- 
tain being shot he was afraid they’d accuse him. So he just 
decided to disappear. He told me he’d get in touch in a few 
months.’ 

The story was not only false but meant to be seen through, 
he was giving her that much. ‘Did that captain really break 
his jaw?’ Kay asked. 

‘I’m afraid that’s true,’ Tom said. ‘But Mike was never a 
vindictive man. I’m sure that had nothing to do with what 
happened.’ 

Kay opened her purse and took out a letter. ‘ Will you de- 
liver this to him if he gets in touch with you?’ 

Hagen shook his head. ‘If I accepted that letter and you 
told a court of law I accepted that letter, it might be interpreted 
as my having knowledge of his whereabouts. Why don’t you 
just wait a bit? I’m sure Mike will get in touch.’ 

She finished her drink and got up to leave. Hagen escorted 
her to the hall but as he opened the door, a woman came in 
from outside. A short, stout woman dressed in black. Kay 
recognized her as Michael’s mother. She held out her hand and 
said, ‘How are you, Mrs G>rleone?’ 

The woman’s small black eyes darted at her for a moment, 
then the wrinkled, leathery, olive-skinned face broke into a 
small curt smile of greeting that was yet in some curious way 
truly friendly. ‘Ah, you Mikey’s little girl,’ Mrs Corleone said. 
She had a heavy Italian accent, Kay could barely understand 
her. ‘You eat something?’ Kay said no, meaning she didn’t 
want anything to eat, but Mrs Corleone turned furiously on 
Tom Hagen and berated him in Italian endings with, ‘You 
don’t even give this poor girl coffee, you disgjra:(ia* She took 
Kay by the hand, the old woman’s hand surprisingly warm and 
alive, and led her into the kitchen. ‘You have coffee and eat 
something, then somebody drive you home. A nice girl like 
you, I don’t want you to take the train.’ She made Kay sit 
down and bustled around the kitchen, tearing off her coat and 
hat and draping them over a chair. In a few seconds there was 
bread and cheese and salami on the table and coffee perking 
on the stove. 


239 



Kay said timidly, ‘I came to ask about Mike, I haven’t heard 
from him. Mr Hagen said nobody knows where he is, that he*]] 
turn up in a little while.’ 

Hagen spoke quickly, ‘That’s all we can tell her now, Ma.’ 

Mrs Corleone gave him a look of withering contempt. ‘Now 
you gonna tell me what to do? My husband don’t tell me what 
to do, God have mercy on him.’ She crossed herself. 

‘Is Mr Corleone all right?* Kay asked. 

‘Fine,’ Mrs Corleone said. ‘Fine. He’s getting old, he’s get- 
ting foolish to let something like that happen.’ She tapped her 
head disrespectfully. She poured the coffee and forced Kay to 
eat some bread and cheese. 

After they drank their coffee Mrs Corleone took one of 
Kay’s hands in her two brown ones. She said quietly, ‘Mikey 
no gonna write you, you no gonna hear from Mikey. He hide 
two-three years. Maybe more, maybe much more. You go 
home to your family and find a nice young fellow and get 
married.’ 

Kay took the letter out of her purse. * Will you send this to 
him?’ 

The old lady took the letter and patted Kay on the cheek. 

‘ Sure, sure,’ she said. Hagen started to protest and she screamed 
at him in Italian. Then she led Kay to the door. There she 
kissed her on the cheek very quickly and said, ‘You forget 
about Mikey, he no the man for you any more.’ 

There was a car waiting for her with two men up front. 
They drove her all the way to her hotel in New York never 
saying a word. Neither did Kay. She was trying to get used to 
the fact that the young man she had loved was a cold-blooded 
murderer. And that she had been told by the most unim- 
peachable source: his mother. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

Carlo Kizzi was punk sore at the world. Once married into 
the Corleone Family, he’d been shunted aside with a small 
bookmaker’s business on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. 


240 



Hc*d counted on one of the houses in the mall on Long Beach, 
he knew the Don could move retainer families out when he 
pleased and he had been sure it would happen and be would 
be on the inside of everything. But the Don wasn’t treating 
him right. The ‘ Great Don*, he thought with scorn. An old 
Moustache Pete who’d been caught out on the street by gun- 
men like any dumb small-time hood. He hoped the old bastard 
croaked. Sonny had been his friend once and if Sonny became 
the head of the Family maybe he’d get a break, get on the 
inside. 

He watched his wife pour his coffee. Christ, what a mess she 
turned out to be. Five months of marriage and she was already 
spreading, besides blowing up. Real guinea broads all these 
Italians in the East. 

He reached out and felt Connie’s soft spreading buttocks. 
She smiled at him and he said contemptuously, ‘You got more 
ham than a hog.’ It pleased him to see the hurt look on her 
face, the tears springing into her eyes. She might be a daughter 
of the Great Don but she was his wife, she was his property 
now and he could treat her as he pleased. It made him feel 
powerful that one of the Corlcones was his doormat. 

He had started her off just right. She had tried to keep that 
purse full of money presents for herself and he had given her 
a nice black eye and taken the money from her. Never told 
her what he’d done with it, cither. That might have rcaUy 
caused some trouble. Even now he felt just the slightest 
twinge of remorse. Christ, he’d blown nearly fifteen grand on 
the track and show girl bimbos. 

He could feel Connie watching his back and so he flexed his 
muscles as he reached for the plate of sweet buns oa the other 
side of the table. He’d just polished off ham and eggs but he 
was a big man and needed a big breakfast. He was pleased with 
the picture he knew he presented to his wife. Not the usual 
greasy dark guin^o husband but crew-cut blond, huge golden- 
haired forearms and broad shoulders and thin waist. And he 
knew he was physically stronger than any of those so-called 
hard guys that worked for the fiuxiily. Guys like Qcmenza, 
Tessio, Rocco Lampone, and that guy PauUe that somebody 
had knocked off. He wondered what the story was about that. 


241 



Then for some reason he thought about Sonny. Man to man 
he could take Sonny, he thought, even though Sonny was a 
little bigger and a little heavier. But what scared him was 
Sonny’s rep, though he himself had never seen Sonny anything 
but good-natured and kidding around. Yeah, Sonny was his 
buddy. Maybe with the old Don gone, things would open up. 

He dawdled over his coffee. He hated this apartment. He 
was used to the bigger living quarters of the West and in a 
little wliile he would have to go crosstown to his ‘book* to 
run the noontime action. It was a Sunday, the heaviest action 
of the week what with baseball going already and the tail end 
of basketball and the night trotters starting up. Gradually he 
became aware of Connie bustling around behind him and he 
turned his head to watch her. 

She was getting dressed up in the real New York City 
guin20 style that he hated. A silk flowered-pattern dress with 
belt, showy bracelet and earrings, flouncy sleeves. She looked 
twenty years older. ‘Where the hell are you going?* he asked. 

She answered him coldly, ‘To see my father out in Long 
Beach. He still can’t get out of bed and he needs company.* 
Carlo was curious. ‘Is Sonny still running the show?* 
Connie gave him a bland look. ‘What show?* 

He was furious. ‘You lousy little guinea bitch, don’t talk to 
me like that or I’ll beat that kid right out of your belly.* She 
looked frightened and this enraged him even more. He sprang 
from his chair and slapped her across the face, the blow leaving 
a red welt. With quick precision he slapped her three more 
times. He saw her upper lip split bloody and pufi" up. That 
stopped him. He didn’t want to leave a mark. She ran into the 
bedroom and slammed the door and he heard the key turning 
in the lock. He laughed and returned to his coffee. 

He smoked until it was time for him to dress. He knocked 
on the door and said, ‘Open it up before I kick it in.’ There 
was no answer. ‘Come on, I gotta get dressed,* he said in a 
loud voice. He could hear her getting up off the bed and com- 
ing towards the door, then the key turned in the lock. When he 
entered she had her back to him, walking back towards the 
bed, lying down on it with her face turned away to the wall. 
He dressed quickly and then saw she was in her slip. He 


242 



wanted her to go visit her &ther, he hoped she would bring 
back information. *What’s the matter, a few slaps take all the 
energy out of you?’ She was a lazy slut. 

‘I don’t wanna go.’ Her voice was tearful, the words mum- 
bled. He reached out impatiently and pulled her around to face 
him. And then he saw why she didn’t want to go and thought 
maybe it was just as well. 

He must have slapped her harder than he figured. Her left 
cheek was blown up, the cut upper lip ballooned grotesquely 
pufiy and white beneath her nose. ‘OK,’ he said, ‘but I won’t 
be home until late. Sunday is my busy day.’ 

He left the apartment and found a parking ticket on his car, 
a fifteen-dollar green one. He put it in the glove compartment 
with the stack of others. He was in a good humour. Slapping 
the spoiled litde bitch around always made him feel good. It 
dissolved some of the frustration he felt at being treated so 
badly by the Corleones. 

The ftrst time he had marked her up, he’d been a little wor- 
ried. She had gone right out to Long Beach to complain to her 
mother and father and to show her black eye. He had really 
sweated it out. But when she came back she had been sur- 
prisingly meek, the dutiful little Italian wife. He had made it a 
point to be the perfect husband over the next few weeks, 
treating her well in every way, being lovey and nice with her, 
banging her every day, morning and night. Finally she had 
told him what had happened since she thought he would never 
act that way again. 

She had found her parents coolly unsympathetic and 
curiously amused. Her mother had had a little sympathy and 
had even asked her father to speak to Carlo Rkzi. Her father 
had refused. ‘She is my daughter,’ he had said, *but now she 
belongs to her husband. He knows his duties. Even the King 
of Italy didn’t dare to meddle with the relationship of husband 
and wife. Go home and learn how to behave so that he will not 
beat you.’ 

Connie had said angrily to her father, ‘Did you ever hit your 
wife?’ She was his fiavourite and could speak to him so im- 
pudently. He had answered, ‘She never gave me reason to 
beat her.’ And her mother had nodded and smiled. 


*45 



She told them how her husband had taken the wedding 
present money and never told her what he did with it. Her 
fether had shrugged and said, *1 would have done the same if 
my wife had been as presumptuous as you/ 

And so she had returned home, a little bewildered, a little 
fnghtened. She had always been her father’s favourite and she 
could not understand his coldness now. 

But the Don had not been so unsympathetic as he pretended. 
He made inquiries and found out what Carlo Rhszi had done 
with the wedding present money. He had men assigned to 
Carlo Rizzi’s bookmaking operation who would report to 
Hagen everything Rirzi did on the job. But the Don could not 
interfere. How expect a man to discbaree his husbandly duties 
to a wife whose family be feared ? Tt was an impossible situ- 
ation and he dared not meddle. Then when Connie became 
pregnant he was convinced of the wisdom of his decision and 
felt he never could interfere though Connie complained to her 
mother about a few more beatings and the mother finally be- 
came concerned enough to mention it to the Don. Connie even 
hinted that she might want a divorce. For the first time in her 
life the Don was angry with her. *He is the father of your 
child. What can a child come to in this world if he has no 
father?’ he said to Connie. 

Learning all this. Carlo Rizzi grew confident. He was per- 
fectly safe. In fact he bragged to his two ' writers ’ on the book, 
Sally Ri* . s and Coach, about how he bounced his wife around 
when she got snotty and saw their looks of respect that he had 
the guts to manhandle the daughter of the great Don Corleone. 

But Rizzi would not have felt so safe if he had known that 
when Sonny Corleone learned of the beatings be had flown 
into a murderous rage and had been restrained only by the 
sternest and most imperious command of the Don himself, a 
command that even Sonny dared not disobey. Which was why 
Sonny avoided Rizzi, not trusting himself to control his temper. 

So feeling perfectly safe on this beautiful Sunday morning. 
Carlo Rizzi sped crosstown on 96th Street to the East Side. He 
did not see Sonny’s car coming the opposite way towards his 
house. 


41 9|t 


*44 



Sonny CodecMie had left the protection of the mall and spent 
the night with Lucy Mandni in town. Now on the way home 
he was travelling with four bodyguards^ two in front and two 
behind. He didn't need guards right beside him, he could take 
care of a single direct assault. The other men travelled in their 
own cars and had apartments on either side of Lucy's apart- 
ment. It was safe to visit her as long as he didn't do it too often. 
But now that he was in town he figured he would pick up his 
sister ODnnie and take her out to Long Beach. He ^ew Carlo 
would be working at his book and the cheap bastard wouldn't 
get her a car. So he'd give his sister a lift out. 

He waited for the two men in front to go into the building 
and then followed them. He saw the two men in back pull up 
behind his car and get out to watch the streets. He kept his 
own eyes open. It was a million-to-one shot that the opposi- 
tion even knew he was in town but he was always carefuL He 
had learned that in the 1930s w^. 

He never used elevators. They were death traps. He climbed 
che eight flights to Connie's apartment, going fast. He knocked 
on her door. He had seen Carlo's car go by and knew she wodd 
be alone. There was no answer. He knocked again and then he 
heard his sister's voice, frightened, timid, asking, ‘Who is it?' 

‘Ihe fright in the voice stunned hhn. His kid sister had always 
been fresh and snotty, tough as anybody in the family. What 
the hell had happened to her? He said, ‘It's Sonny. ' The bolt 
inside slid back and the door opened and Connie was in his 
anns sobbing. He was so surprised he just stood there. He 
pushed her away from him and saw her swollen free and he 
understood what had happened. 

He pulled away from her to run down the stairs and go after 
her husband. Rage flamed up in him, contorting his own free. 
Connie saw the rage and clung to him, not letting him go, 
making him come into the apartment. She was weeping out of 
terror now. She knew her older brother's temper and feared it. 
She had never complained to him about Carlo for that reason. 
Now she made him come into the apartment with her. 

‘It was my fruit,' she said. ‘I start^ a fight with him and I 
tried to hit 1 ^ so he hit me. He really didn't try to hit me that 
hard. I walked into it.' 





Sonny’s heavy Cupid face was under control. * You going to 
see the old man today?’ 

She didn’t answer, so he added, ‘I thought you were, so 1 
dropped over to give you a lift. I was in the city anyway.’ 

She shook her head. ‘1 don’t want them to see me this way. 
rU come next week.*' 

*OK,’ Sonny said. He picked up her kitchen phone and 
dialled a number. ‘I’m getting a doctor to come over here and 
take a look at you and £x you up. In your condition you have to 
be careful. How many months before you have the kid?’ 

‘Two months,’ Connie said. ‘Sonny, please don’t do any- 
thing. Please don’t.’ 

Sonny laughed. His face was cruelly intent when he said, 
‘Don’t worry, I won’t make your kid an orphan before he’s 
bom.’ He left the apartment after kissing her lightly on her 
uninjured cheek. 

On East 1 1 zth Street a long line of cars were double-parked 
in front of a candy store that was the headquarters of Carlo 
Rizzi’s book. On the sidewalk in front of the store, fathers 
played catch with small children they had taken for a Sunday 
morning ride and to keep them company as they placed their 
bets. When they saw Carlo Rizzi coming they stopped playing 
ball and bought their kids ice cream to keep them quiet. Then 
they started studying the newspapers that gave the starting 
pitchers, trying to pick out winning baseball bets for the day. 

Carlo went into the large room in the back of the store. His 
two ‘writers’, a small wiry man called Sally Rags and a big 
husky fellow called Coach, were already waiting for the action 
to start. They had their huge lined pads in front of them ready 
to write down bets. On a wooden stand was a blackboard with 
the names of the sixteen big league baseball teams chalked on 
it, paired to show who was playing against who. Against each 
pairing was a blocked-out square to enter the odds. 

Carlo asked Coach, ‘Is the store phone tapped today?’ 

Coach shook his head. ‘The tap is still off.’ 

Carlo went to the wall phone and dialled a number. Sally 
Rags and Coach watched him impassively as he jotted down 
the ‘ line the odds on all the baseball games for that day. They 

246 



watched him as he hung up the phone and walked over to the 
blackboard and chalked up the odds against each game. 
Though Gurlo did not know it, they had already got the line 
and were checking his work. In the first week in his job Girlo 
had made a mistake in transposing the odds on to the black- 
board and had created that dream of all gamblers, a * middle’. 
That is, by betting the odds with him and then betting against 
the same team with another bookmaker at the correct odds, 
the gambler could not lose. The only one who could lose was 
Carlo’s book. That mistake had caused a six-thousand-doUar 
loss in the book for the week and confirmed the Don’s judge- 
ment about his son-in-law. He had given the word that all of 
Carlo’s work was to be checked. 

Normally the highly placed members of the Corleone Family 
would never be concerned with such an operational detail. 
There was at least a five-layer insulation to their level. But 
since the book was being used as a testing ground for the son- 
in-law, it had been placed under the direct scrutiny of Tom 
Hagen, to whom a report was sent every day. 

Now with the line posted, the gamblers were thronging into 
the back room of the candy store to jot down the odds on their 
newspapers next to the games printed there with probable 
pitchers. Some of them held their little children by the hand 
as they looked up at the blackboard. One guy who made big 
bets looked down at the litde girl he was holding by the hand 
and said teasingly, ‘Who do you like today, Honey, Giants or 
the Pirates?’ The little girl, fascinated by the colourful names, 
said, ‘Are Giants stronger than Pirates?’ The father laughed. 

A line began to form in front of the two writers. When a 
writer filled one of his sheets he tore it off, wrapped the money 
he had collected in it and handed it to Carlo. Carlo went out 
the back exit of the room and up a flight of steps to an apart- 
ment which housed the candy store owner’s fainily. He c^ed 
in the bets to his central exchange and put the money in a 
small wall safe that was hidden by an extended window drape. 
Then he went back down into the candy store after having 
first burned the bet sheet and flushed its ashes down the toilet 
bowl. 

None of the Sunday games started before two pm because of 

*47 



the blue laws, so after the first crowd of betters, family men 
who had to get their bets in and rush home to take their 
families to the beach, came the trickling of bachelor gamblers 
or the diehards who condemned their families to Sundays in 
the hot city apartments. These bachelor betters were the big 
gamblers, they bet heavier and came back around four o'^clock 
to bet the second games of doubleheaders. They were the ones 
who made Carlo’s Sundays a full-time day with overtime, 
though some married men called in from the beach to try and 
recoup their losses. 

By one-thirty the betting had trickled off so that Carlo and 
Sally Rags could go out and sit on the stoop beside the candy 
store and get some fresh air. They watched the stickhail game 
the kids were having. A police car went by. They ignored it. 
This book had very heavy j>rotcction at the precinct and 
couldn’t be touched on a local level. A raid would have to be 
ordered from the very top and even then a warning would 
come through in plenty of time. 

Coach came out and sat beside them. They gossiped a while 
about baseball and women. Carlo said laughingly, *1 had to 
bat my wife around again today, teach her who’s boss.’ 

Coach said casually, * She’s knocked up pretty big now, ain’t 
she?' 

^Ahh, 1 just slapped her face a few times,’ Carlo said. *1 
didn’t hurt her,’ He brooded for a moment. ‘She thinks she 
can boss me around, I don’t stand for that.’ 

There were still a few betters hanging around shooting the 
breeze, talking baseball, some of them sitting on the steps 
above the two writers and Carlo. Suddenly the kids playing 
stickball in the street scattered. A car came screeching up the 
block and to a halt in front of the candy store. It stopped so 
abruptly that the tyres screamed and before it had stopped, 
almost, a man came hurtling out of the driver’s scat, moving 
so fast that everybody was paralysed. The man was Sonny 
Corleone. 

His heavy Cupid-featured face w ith its thick, curved mouth 
was an ugly mask of fury. In a split second he was at the stoop 
and had grabbed Carlo Rizzi by the throat. He pulled Carlo 
away from the others, trying to drag him into the street, but 

248 



Carlo wrapped his huge muscular arms around the iron railings 
of the stoop and hung on. He cringed aw'ay, trying to hide his 
head and face in the hollow of his shoulders. His shirt ripped 
away in Sonny’s hand. 

What followed then ^vas sickening. Sonny began heating the 
cowering Carlo with his hscs, cursing him in a thick, rage- 
choked voice. Carlo, despite his tremendous physique, offered 
no resistance, gave no cry for mercy oi protest. Coach and 
Rags dared not interfere. They thought Sonny meant to 
kill his brother dn-law and had no desire to share his fate. The 
kids playing stickhuU gathered to curse the driver who had 
made them scatter, but now v ere watching with awestruck 
iatercst. 1 hey were tough kids but the sight of Sonny in his 
rage silenced them. Meanwhile another car had drawn up 
behind Sonny's and two of his bodyguards jumped out. When 
they saw what was happening they too dared not interfere. 
They stood alert, ready to protect .heir chief if any bystanders 
had the stupidity to try to help Carlo. 

WTiat made the sight sickening was Carlo’s complete subjec- 
tion, but it was perhaps this that saved his life. He clung to the 
iron railings with his hands so that Sonny could not drag him 
into the street and despite his obvious equal strength, still 
refused to fight back. He let the blows rain on his unprotected 
head and neck until Sonny’s rage ebbed. Finally, his chest 
heaving. Sonny looked down at him and said, ‘You dirty 
bastard, you ever beat up my sister again J’ll kill you.’ 

These words released the tension. Because of course, if 
Sonny intended to kill the man he would never have uttered 
the threat. He uttered it in frustration because he could not 
carry it out. Carlo refused to look at Sonny. He kept his head 
down and his hands and arms entwined in the iron railing. He 
stayed that way until the car roared off and he heard Coach say 
in his curiously paternal voice, *OK, Carlo, come on into the 
store. Let’s get out of sight.’ 

It was only then that Carlo dared to get out of his orouch 
against the stone steps of the stoop and unlock his hands from 
the railing. Standing up, he could see the kids look at him with 
the staring, sickened ffices of people who had witnessed the 
degradation of a fellow human being. He was a little di22y but 


^9 



it was more from shock, the raw fear that had taken command 
of his body; he was not badly hurt despite the shower of heavy 
blows. He let Coach lead him by the arm into the back room 
of the candy store and put ice on his face, which, though it 
was not cut or bleeding, was lumpy with swelling bruises. 
The fear was subsiding now and the humiliation he had suffered 
made him sick to his stomach so that he had to throw up. 
Coach held his head over the sink, supported him as if he were 
drunk, then helped him upstairs to the apartment and made 
him lie down in one of the bedrooms. Carlo never noticed that 
Sally Rags had disappeared. 

Sally Rags iiad walked down to Third Avenue and called 
Rocco Lampone to report what had happened. Rocco took the 
news calmly and in his turn called his caporeffme^ Pete Qem- 
en2a. Clemenza groaned and said, ‘Oh, Christ, that goddamn 
Sonny and his temper,’ but his finger had prudently clicked 
down on the hook so that Rocco never heard his remark. 

Clemenza called the house in Long Beach and got Tom 
Hagen. Hagen was silent for a moment and then he said, ‘ Send 
some of your people and cars out on the road to Long Beach 
as soon as you can, just in case Sonny gets held up by traffic or 
an accident. When he gets sore like that he doesn’t know what 
the hell he’s doing. Maybe some of our friends on the other 
side will hear he was in town. You never can tell.’ 

Clemenza said doubtfully, ‘By the time I could get anybody 
on the road, Sonny will be home. That goes for the Tattaglias 
too.’ 

‘I know,’ Hagen said patiently. ‘But if something out of the 
ordinary happens. Sonny may be held up. Do the best you can, 
Pete.’ 

Grudgingly Gemenza called Rocco Lampone and told him 
to get a few people and cars and cover the road to Long Beach. 
He himself went out to his beloved Cadillac and with three of 
the platoon of guards who now garrisoned his home, started 
over the Atlantic Beach Bridge, towards New York Qty. 

One of the hangers-on around the candy store, a small better 
on the payroll of the Tattaglia Family as an informer, called the 
contact he had with his people. But the Tattaglia Family had 
not streamlined itself for the war, the contact had to go aU 


250 



the way through the insulation layers before he finally got to 
the caporegime who contacted the Tattaglia chief. By that time 
Sonny Corleone was safely back in the mall, in his father*s 
house, in Long Beach, about to face his father’s wrath. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

T HE WAR of 1947 between the Corleone Family and the Five 
Families combined against them proved to be expensive for 
both sides. It was complicated by the police pressure put on 
everybody to solve the murder of Captain McQuskcy. It was 
rare that operating officials of the Police Department ignored 
political muscle that protected gambling and vice operations, 
but in this case the politicians were as helpless as the general 
staff of a rampaging, looting army whose field officers refuse 
to follow orders. 

This lack of protection did not hurt the Corleone Family as 
much as it did their opponents. The Corleone group depended 
on gambling for most of its income, and was hit especially hard 
in its ‘numbers* or ‘policy* branch of operations. The runners 
who picked up the action were swept into police nets and 
usually given a medium shellacking before being booked. 
Even some of the ‘banks * were located and raided, with heavy 
financial loss. The ‘bankers*, .90 calibres in their own right, 
complained to the caporegimeSy who brought thfeir complaints 
to the family council table. But there was nothing to be done. 
The bankers were told to go out of business. Ldcal Negro 
freelancers were allowed to take over the operation in Harlem, 
the richest territory, and they operated in such scattered fashion 
that the police found it hard to pin them down. 

After the death of Captain McQuskey, some newspapers 
printed stories involving him with S0II0220. They published 
proof that McQuskey had received large sums of money in 
cash, shortly before His death. These stories had been planted 
by Hagen, the information supplied by him. The Police De- 
partment refused to confirm or deny these stories, but they 



were taking effect. The police force got the word through 
informers, through police on the Family payroll, that Me- 
Quskey had been a rogue cop. Not that he had taken money 
or clean graft, there was no rank-and-file onus to that. But that he 
had taken the dirtiest of dirty money; murder and drugs money. 
And in the morality of policemen, this was unforgivable. 

Hagen understood that the policeman belie^^es in law and 
order in a curiously innocent way. He believed in it more than 
does the public he serves. Law and order is, after all, the magic 
from which he derives his power, individual power which he 
cherishes as nearly all men cherish individual power. And yet 
there is always the smouldering resentment against the public 
he serves. They are at the same time his ward and his prey. As 
wards they are ungrateful, abusive and demanding. As prey 
they are slippery and dangerous, full of guile. As soon as one 
is in the policeman’s clutches the mechanism of the society the 
policeman defends marshals all its resources to cheat him of his 
prize. The fix is put in by politicians. Judges give lenient sus- 
pended sentences to the worst hoodlums. Governors of the 
States and the President of the United States himself give full 
pardons, assuming that respected lawyers have not already 
won his acquittal. After a time the cop learns. Why should he 
not collect the fees these hoodlums are paying? He needs it 
more. His children, why should they not go to college? Why 
shouldn’t his wife shop in more expensive places? Why 
shouldn’t he himself get the sun with a winter vacation in 
Florida? After all, he risks his life and that is no joke. 

But usually he draws the line against accepting dirty graft. 
He will take money to let a bookmaker operate. He will take 
mopey from a man who hates getting parking tickets or speed- 
ing tickets. He will allow call girls and prostitutes to ply their 
trade; for a consideration. These are vices natural to man. But 
usually he will not take a payoff for drugs, armed robberies, 
rape, murder and other assorted perversions. In his mind these 
attack the very core of his personal authority and cannot be 
countenanced. 

The murder of a police captain was comparable to regicide. 
But when it became known that McCluskcy had been killed 
while in the company of a notorious narcotics peddler, when it 



became known that he was suspected of conspiracy to murder, 
the police desire for vengeance began to fade. Also, after all, 
there were still mortgage payments to be made, cars to be paid 
off, children to be launched into the world. Without their 
' sheet ^ money, policemen had to scramble to make ends meet. 
Unlicenccd peddlers were good for lunch money. Parking 
ticket payoffs came to nickels and dimes. Some of the more 
desperate even began shaking down suspects (homoseicuals, 
assaults and batteries) in the precinct squad rooms. Finally the 
brass relented. They raised the prices and let the Faroes 
operate. Once again the payoff sheet was typed up by the 
precinct bagman, listing every man assigned to the local 
station and what his cut was each month. Some semblance of 
social order was restored. 

It had been Hagen*s idea to use private detectives to guard 
Don Corleone’s hospital room. These were, of course, supple- 
mented by the much more formidable soldiers of Tessio’s 
re^'me. But Sonny was not satisfied ev'en with this. By the 
middle of February, when the Don could be moved without 
danger, be was taken by ambulance to his home in the mall. 
The house had been renovated so that his bedroom was now 
a hospital room with all equipment necessary for any emer- 
gency, Nurses specially recruited and checked had been hired 
for round-the-clock care, and Dr Kennedy, with the payment 
of a huge fee, bad been persuaded to become the physician in 
residence to this private hospital. At least until the Don would 
need only nursing care. 

The mall itself was made impregnable. Button men were 
moved into the extra houses, the tenants sent on vacations to 
their native villages in Italy, all expenses paid. 

Freddie Corleone had been sent to Las Vegas to recuperate 
and also to scout out the ground for a Family operation in the 
luxury hotel-gambling casino complex that was springing up. 
Las Vegas was part of the West Coast empire still neutral and 
the Don of that empire had guaranteed Freddie’s safety there. 
The New York five Families had no desire to make more 
enemies by going into Vegas after Freddie Corleone. They had 
enough trouble on their hands in New York. 


*55 



Dr Kennedy had forbidden any discussion of business in front 
of the Don. This edict was completely disregarded. The Don 
insisted on the council of war being held in his room. Sonny, 
Tom Hagen, Pete Qemen2a, and Tessio gathered there the very 
first night of his homecoming. 

Don Corlcone was too weak to speak much but he wished to 
listen and exercise veto powers. Vdien it was explained that 
Freddie had been sent to Las Vegas to learn the gambling 
.casino business, he nodded his head approvingly. When he 
learned that Bruno Tattaglia had been killed by Corleone 
button men he shook his head and sighed. But what distressed 
him most of all was learning that Michael had killed Sollozzo 
and Captain McCluskey and had then been forced to flee to 
Sicily. When he heard this he motioned them out and they 
continued the conference in the corner room that held the law 
library. 

Sonny Corleone relaxed in the huge armchair behind the 
desk. 'I think we’d better let the old man take it easy for a 
couple of weeks, until the doc says he can do business.’ He 
paused. ‘I’d like to have it going again before he gets better. 
We have the go-ahead from the cops to operate. The first 
thing is the policy banks in Harlem. The black boys up there 
had their fun, now we have to take it back. They screwed up 
the works but good, just like they usually do when they run 
things. A lot of their runners didn’t pay off winners. They drive 
up in Cadillacs and tell their players they gotta wait for their 
dough or maybe just pay them half what they win. I don’t want 
any runner looking rich to his players. I don’t want them 
dressing too good. I don’t want them driving new cars. I don’t 
want them welching on paying a winner. And I don’t 
want any freelancers staying in business, they give us a bad 
name. Tom, let’s get that project moving right away. Every- 
thing else will fall in line as soon as you send out the word that 
the lid is off.’ 

Hagen said, ‘ There are some very tough boys up in Harlem. 
They got a taste of the big money. They won’t go back to be- 
ing runners or sub-bankers again.* 

Sonny shrugged. ‘Just give their names to Qemenza. That’s 
his job, straightening them out.’ 


*54 



Qemenza said to Hagen, *No problem.’ 

It was Tessio who brought up the most important question. 
‘Once we start operating, the five Families start their raids. 
They’ll hit our bankers in Harlem and our bookmakers on the 
East Side. They may even try to make things tough for the 
garment centre outfits we service. This war is going to cost a 
lot of money.’ 

‘Maybe they won’t,’ Sonny said. ‘They know we’ll hit them 
right back. I’ve got peace feelers out and maybe we can settle 
everything by paying an indemnity for the Tattaglia kid.’ 

Hagen said, ‘We’re getting the cold shoulder on those 
negotiations. They lost a lot of dough the last few months and 
they blame us for it. With justice. I think what they want is for 
us to agree to come in on the narcotics trade, to use the Family 
influence politically. In other words, Sollo22o’5 deal minus 
SoUozzo. But they won’t broach that until they’ve hurt us with 
some sort of combat action. Then after we’ve been softened up 
they figure we’ll listen to a proposition on narcotics.’ 

Sonny said curtly, ‘No d^ on drugs. The Don said no and 
it’s no until he changes it.’ 

Hagen said briskly, ‘Then we’re faced with a tactical prob- 
lem. Our money is out in the open. Bookmaking and policy. 
We can be hit. But the Tattaglia Family has prostitution and 
call girls and the dock unions. How the hell are we going to 
hit them? The other Families are in some gambling. But most 
of them are in the construction trades, shylocking, controlling 
the unions, getting the government contracts. They get a lot 
from strong-arm and other stuff that involves innocent people. 
Thek money isn’t out in the street. The Tattaglia nightclub is 
too famous to touch, it would cause too much of a stink. And 
with the Don still out of action their political influence matches 
ours. So we’ve got a real problem here.’ 

‘It’s my problem, Tom,’ Sonny said. ‘I’ll find the answer. 
Keep the negotiation alive and follow through on the other 
stuff. Let’s go back into business and see what happens. Then 
we’ll take it from there. Qemenza and Tessio have plenty of 
soldiers, we can match the whole Five Families gun for gun 
if that’s the way they want it. We’ll just go to the mattresses.’ 

There was no problem getting the freelance Negro bankers 


^55 



out of business. The police were informed and cracked down. 
With a special effort. At that time it was not possible for a 
Negro to make a payoff to a high police or political official to 
keep such an operation going. This was due to racial prejudice 
and racial distrust more than anything else. But Harlem had 
always been considered a minor problem, and its settlement 
was expected. 

The Five Families struck in an unexpected direction. Two 
powerful officials in the garment unions were killed, officials 
who were members of the Corleone Family. Then the Corlcone 
Family shylocks were barred from the waterfront pic ns were 
the Corleone Family bookmakers. The longshore^ or '?: uajon 
locals had gone over to the Five Families. Corleone book- 
makers all over the city were threatened to persuade them to 
change their allegiance. The biggest numbers banker in Hailcm, 
an old friend and ally of the Corleone Family, brutally 
murdered. Tliere was no longer ahy option, bonny fold his 
caporepmes to go to the mattresses. 

Two apartments were set up in the city and furnished with 
mattresses for the button men to sleep on, a rcfrigcratoi: for 
food, and guns and ammunition. Qcmenxa staffed one apatt- 
meot and Tessio the other. All Family bookmakers were given 
bodyguard teams. The policy bankers in Harlem, however, 
had gone over to the enemy and at the moment nothing could 
be done about that. All this cost the Corleone Family a great 
deal of money and very little was coming in. As the next few 
months went by, other things became obvious. The most im- 
portant was that the Corleone Family had overmatched itself. 

There were reasons for this. With the Don still too weak to 
take a part, a great deal of the Family’s political strength was 
ncufralixed. Also, the last ten years of peace had seriously 
eroded the fighting qualities of the two caporeffmes^ Clemenza 
and Tessio. Clemenza was still a competent executioner and 
administrator but he no longer had the energy or the youthful 
strength to lead troops. Tessio had mellowed with age and was 
not ruthless enough. Tom Hagen, despite his abilities, was 
simply not suited to be a Consi^ori in a time of war. His main 
fiiult was that be was not a Sicilian. 

Sonny Corleone recognized these weaknesses in the Family’s 

256 



wtniinc postutc but could not take any steps to temedy diem. 
He iFas not the Don and only the Don could xeplaoe the 
capertffmes and the C&nsigliori. And the very act of replaoemefit 
•would make the situation more dangerous, might precipitate 
some treachery. At first. Sonny had thought of fighting a hold- 
ing action until the Don could become well enough to take 
charge, but with the defection of the policy bankers, the ter- 
roriaation of the bookmakers, the Family position was becom- 
ing precarious. He decided to strike back. 

But he decided to strike right at the heart of the enemy. He 
plamied the execution of the heads of the five Families in one 
grand tactical manoeuvre. To that purpose he put into efiect an 
elaborate system of surveillance of these leasts. But after a 
week the enemy chiefs promptly dived underground and were 
seen no more in public. 

The Five Fam^es and the Corleone Empire were in stide- 
mate. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

Amerigo Bonasera lived only a few blocks from his 
undertaking establishment on Mul^rry Street and so always 
went home for supper. Evenings he returned to his place of 
business, dutifully joining those mourners paying their res- 
pects to the dead who lay in state in his sombre parlours. 

He always resented the jokes made about his profession, die 
macabre technical details which were so unimportant. Of 
course none of his friends or family or neighbours would make 
such jokes. Any profession was worthy of respect to men who 
for centuries earned bread by the sweat of their brows. 

Now at supper with his wife in their solidly furnished apart- 
ment, gilt statues of the Virgin Mary with their red-glassed 
candles flickering on the sideboard, Bonasera lit a Camd 
dgarette and took a relaxing glass of American whisky. Hit 
wife brought steaming plates s^up to the table. The two of 
them were alone now; he had sdit his daughter to live in 

*57 


, Godfather 



Boston with her mothcr^s sister, where she could forget her 
terrible experience and her injuries at the hands of the two 
ruffians Don Q>rleone had punished. 

As they ate their soup his wife asked, ‘Are you going back 
to work tonight?’ 

Amerigo Bonasera nodded. His wife respected his work but 
did not understand it. She did not understand that the tech* 
nical part of his profession was the least important. She 
thought, like most other people, that he was paid for his skill 
in making the dead look so lifelike in their coffins. And indeed 
his skill in this was legendary. But even more important, even 
more necessary was his physical presence at the wake. When 
the bereaved family came at night to receive their blood rela- 
tives and their friends beside the coffin of their loved one, they 
needed Amerigo Bonasera with them. 

For he was a strict chaperone to death. His face always grave, 
yet strong and comforting, his voice unwavering, yet muted 
to a low register, he commanded the mourning ritual. He 
could quiet grief that was too unseemly, he could rebuke un- 
ruly children whose parents had not the heart to chastise. 
Never cloying in the tender of his condolences, yet never was 
he offhand. Once a family used Amerigo Bonasera to speed a 
loved one on, they came back to him again and again. And he 
never, never, deserted one of his clients on that terrible last 
night above ground. 

Usually he allowed himself a little nap after supper. Then he 
washed and shaved afresh, talcum powder generously used to 
shroud the heavy black beard. A mouthwash always. He re- 
spectfully changed into fresh linen, white gleaming shirt, the 
black tie, a freshly pressed dark suit, dull black shoes and black 
socks. And yet the effect was comforting instead of sombre. 
He also kept his hair dyed black, an unheard-of frivolity in an 
Italian male of his generation; but not out of vanity. Simply 
because his hair had turned a lively pepper and salt, a colour 
which struck him as -unseemly for his profession. 

After he finished his soup, his wife placed a small steak be- 
fore him with a few forkfuls of green spinach oozing yellow 
oil. He was a light cater. When he finished this he drank a cup 
of coffee and smoked another Camel cigarette. Over his coffee 

25 B 



he thought about his poor daughter. She would never be the 
same. Her outward beauty had been restored but there was die 
look of a frightened animal in her eyes that had made him 
unable to bear the sight of her. And so they had sent her to 
live in Boston for a time. Time would heal her wounds. Pain 
and terror were not so final as deaths as he well knew. His work 
made him an optimist. 

He had just finished the coffee when his phone in the living 
room rang. His wife never answered it when he was home, so 
he got up and drained his cup and stubbed out his cigarette. 
As he walked to the phone he pulled ofT his tie and started 
to unbutton his shirt, getting ready for his little nap. Then 
he picked up the phone and said with quiet courtesy, 
‘HcUo.* 

The voice on the other end was harsh, strained. *This is 
Tom Hagen,’ it said. ^I’m calling for Don Corleone, at his 
request.’ 

Amerigo Bonasera felt the coffix churning sourly in his 
stomach, felt himself going a httle sick. It was more than a 
year since he had put himself in the debt of the Don to avenge 
his daughter’s honour and in that time the knowledge that he 
must pay that debt had receded. He had been so grated seeing 
the bloc^y faces of those two ruffians that he would have done 
anything for the Don. But time erodes gratitude more quickly 
than it does beauty. Now Bonasera felt the sickness of a man 
faced with disaster. His voice faltered as he answered, * Yes, I 
understand. I’m listening.’ 

He was suiprised at the coldness in Hagen’s voice. The Cm- 
ngliori had always been a courteous man, though not Italian, 
but now he was being rudely brusque. *You owe the Don a 
service,’ Hagen said. * He has no doubt, that you will repay him. 
That you will be happy to have this opportunity. In one hour, 
not b^ore, perhaps later, he will be at your funeral parlour to 
ask for your help. Be there to greet him. Don’t have any people 
who work for you there. Send them home. If you have any 
objections to this, speak now and I’ll inform Don Corleone. 
He has other friends who can do him this service.’ 

Amerigo Bonasera almost cried out in his fright, *How can 
you think I would refuse the Godfather? Of course I’ll do 



anything he wishes. I haven’t forgotten my debt. I’ll go to my 
business immediately, at once.* 

Hagen’s voice was gentler now, but there was something 
strange about it. ‘Thank you,* he said. ‘The Don never 
doubted you. The question was mine. Oblige him tonight and 
you can always come to me in any trouble, you’ll earn my 
personal friendship.’ 

This frightened Amerigo Bonasera even more. He stuttered, 
*The Don himself is coming to me tonight?’ 

‘Yes,* Hagen said. 

‘Then he’s completely recovered from his injuries, thank 
God,’ Bonasera said. His voice made it a question. 

There was a pause at the other end of the phone, then 
Hagen’s voice said very quietly, ‘Yes.’ There was a click and 
the phone went dead. 

Bonasera was sweating. He went into the bedroom and 
changed his shirt and rinsed his mouth. But he didn’t shave or 
use a fresh tie. He put on the same one he had used during the 
day. He called the hineral parlour and told his assistant to stay 
with the bereaved family using the front parlour that night. He 
himself would be busy in the laboratory working area of the 
building. When the assistant started asking questions Bonasera 
cut him off very curtly and told him to follow orders exactly. 

He put on his suit jacket and his wife, still eating, looked up 
at him in surprise. ‘I have work to do,’ he said and she did not 
dare question him because of the look on his face. Bonasera 
went out of the house and walked the few blocks to his funeral 
parlour. 

This building stood by itself on a large lot with a white 
picket fence running all around it. There was a narrow road- 
way leading from the street to the rear, just wide enough for 
ambulances and hearses. Bonasera unlocked the gate and left 
it open. Then he walked to the rear of the building and entered 
it through the wide door there. As he did so he could see 
mourners already entering the front door of the funeral parlour 
to pay their respects to the current corpse. 

Many years ago when Bonasera had bought this building 
from an undertaker planning to retire, there had been a stoop 
of about ten steps that mourners had to mount before entering 

160 



the fiiiiend parlour. This had posed a pipblem. Old and 
pled mourners determined to pay tfaeit respects had found the 
steps almost impossible to mount, so the former undertaker 
had used the freight elevator for these people, a small metal 
platform, that rose out of the ground beside the building. The 
elevator was for cofHns and bodies. It would descend under- 
ground, then rise into the funeral parlour itself, so that a 
crippled mourner would find himself rising through the floor 
beside the coffin as other mourners moved their black chairs 
aside to let the elevator rise through the trapdoor. Then when 
the crippled or aged mourner had finished paying his respects,, 
the elevator wcidd again come up through the polished floor 
to take him down and out again. 

Amerigo Booasera had found this solution to the problem 
unseemly and penny-pinching. So he had had the front of the 
building remodelled, the stoop done away with and a slightly 
inclining walk put in its place. But of course the elevator was 
still used for coffins and corpses. 

In the rear of the building, cut off from the funeral parlour 
and reception rooms by a massive soundproof door, was the 
business office, the embalming room, a storeroom for coffins, 
and a carefully locked closet holding chemicals and the awful 
tools of his trade. Bonasera went to the office, sat at his desk 
and lit up a Camel, one of the few times he had ever smoked 
in this building. Then he waited for Don Corleone. 

He waited with a feeling of the utmost despair. For he had 
no doubt as to what services he would be called upon to per- 
form. For the last year the Corleone Family had waged war 
against the five great Mafia Families of New York and the 
carnage had filled the newspapers. Many men qn both sides 
had been killed. Now the Corleone Family had killed some- 
body so important that they wished to hide his body, make it 
disappear, and what better way than to have it officially buried 
by a registered undertaker? And Amerigo Bonasera had no 
illusions about the act he was to commit. He would be an 
accessory to murder. If it came out, he would spend years in 
jaiL His daughter and wife would be disgraced, his good name, 
the respected name of Amerigo Bonasera, dragged through 
the blo^y mud of the Mafia war. 

261 



He indulged himself hy smoking another Camel. And then 
he thought of something even more terrifying. When the other 
Mafia Families found out that he had aided the Corleones they 
would treat him as an ei^my. They would murder him. And 
now he cursed the day he had gone to the Godfather and beg- 
ged for his vengeance. He cursed the day his wife and the wife 
of Don Corleone had become friends, fie cursed his daughter 
and America and his own success. And then his optimism 
returned. It could all go well. Don Corleone was a clever man. 
Certainly everything had been arranged to keep the secret. He 
had only to keep his nerve. For of course the one thing more 
fatal than any other was' to earn the Don’s displeasure. 

He heard tyres on gravel. His practised ear told him a car 
was coming dirough the narrow driveway and parking in the 
back yard. He opened the rear door to let them in. The huge 
fat man, Clemen2a, entered, followed by two very rough- 
looking young fellows. They searched the rooms without say- 
ing a word to Bonasera, then Clemenza went out. The two 
young men remained with the undertaker. 

A few moments later Bonasera recognized the sound of a 
heavy ambulance coming through the narrow driveway. Then 
Qemenza appeared in the doorway followed by two men 
carrying a stretcher. And Amerigo Bonascra’s worst fears 
were realized. On the stretcher was a corpse swaddled in a 
grey blanket but with bare yellow feet sticking out the end. 

Qemenza motioned the stretcher-bearers into the embalm- 
ing room. And then from the blackness of the yard another 
man stepped into the lighted office room. It was Don Corleone. 

The Don had lost weight during his illness and moved with 
a curious stiffness. He was holding his hat in his hands and his 
hair seamed thin over his massive skull. He looked older, more 
shrunken than when Bonasera had seen him at the wedding, 
but he still radiated power. Holding his hat against his chest, 
he said to Bonasera, ‘ Well, old friend, are you ready to do me 
this service?’ 

Bonasera nodded. The Don followed the stretcher into the 
embalming room and Bonasera trailed after him. The corpse 
was on one of the guttered tables. Don Corleone made a tiny 
gesture with his hat and the other men left the room. 

262 



Bonaseta whispered, ‘What do you wish me to do?* 

Don Corleone was staring at the table. ‘I want you to use all 
your powers, all your skill, as you love me,’ he said. ‘Irlo not 
wish his mother to see him as he is.’ He went to the table and 
drew down the grey blanket. Amerigo Bonasera against all his 
will, against all his years of training and experience, let out a 
gasp of horror. On the embalming table was the bullet- 
smashed face of Sonny Corleone. The left eye drowned in 
blood had a star fracture in its lens. The bridge of his nose and 
left cheekbone were hammered into pulp. 

For one fraction of a second the Don put out his hand to 
support himself against Bonasera’s body. ‘ See how they have 
massacred my son,’ he said. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

Perhaps it was the stalemate that made Sonny Corleone 
embark on the bloody course of attrition that ended in his own 
death. Perhaps it was his dark violent nature given full rein. 
In any case, that spring and summer he mounted senseless raids 
on enemy auxiliaries. Tattaglia Family pimps were shot to death 
in Harlem, dock goons were massacred. Union officials who 
owed allegiance to the Five Families were warned to stay 
neutral, and when the Corleone bookmakers and shy locks 
were still barred from the docks. Sonny sent Qemenza and his 
regime to wreak havoc upon the long shore. 

This slaughter was senseless because it could ndt affect the 
outcome of the war. Sonny was a brilliant tactician and won 
his brilliant victories. But what was needed was the strategical 
genius of Don Corleone. The whole thing degenerated into 
such a deadly guerrilla war that both sides found themselves 
losing a great deal of revenue and lives to no purpose. The 
Corleone Family was finally forced to dose down some of its 
most profitable bookmaking stations, including the book given 
to son-in-law Carlo Rizsd for his living. Carlo took to drink and 
running with chorus girls and giving his wife Connie a hard 

263 



tune. Since his beating at the hands of Sonny he had not dared 
to hit his wife again but he had not slept with her. Connie bad 
thrown herself at his feet and he had spumed her, as he thought, 
like a Roman, with exquisite patrician pleasure. He had sneered 
at her, *Go call your brother and tell him I won^t screw you, 
maybe he’ll beat me up until I get a hard on.’ 

But he was in deadly fear of Sonny though they treated each 
other with cold politeness. Carlo had the sense to realize that 
Sonny would kill him, that Sonny was a man who could, with 
the naturalness of an animal, kill another man, while he him- 
self would have to call up all his courage, all his wiD, to com- 
mit murder. It never occurred to Carlo that because of this he 
was a better man than Sonny Corleone, if such terms could be 
used; he envied Sonny his awesome savagery, a savagery which 
was now becoming a legend. 

Tom Hagen, as the Consigliori^ disapproved of Sonny’s tac- 
tics and yet decided not to protest to the Don simply because 
the tactics, to some extent, worked. The Five Families seemed 
to be cowed, finally, as the attrition went on, and their 
counterblows weakened and finally ceased altogether. Hagen 
at first distrusted this seeming pacification of the enemy but 
Sonny was jubilant. ‘I’ll pour it on,’ he told Hagen, ‘and then 
those bastards will come begging for a deal.’ 

Sonny was worried about other things. His wife was giving 
him a hard time because the rumours had got to her that 
Lucy Mancini had bewitched her husband. And though she 
joked publicly about her Sonny’s equipment and technique, he 
had stayed awayfrom hertoolongand she missed himinherbed, 
and she was making life miserable for him with her nagging. 

In, addition to this Sonny was under the enormous strain of 
being a marked man. He had to be extraordinarily careful in all 
his movements and he knew that his visits to Lucy Mancini 
had been charted by the enemy. But here he took elaborate 
precautions since this was the traditional vulnerable spot. He 
was safe there. Though Lucy had not the slightest suspicion, 
she was watched twenty-four hours a day by men of the San- 
tino regime and when an apartment became vacant on her floor 
it was immediately rented by one of the most reliable men of 
that regime. 


264 



The Don was tecoTering and would soon be aUe to tesume 
command. At that time the tide of battle must swing to the 
Corleone Family. This Sonny was sure of. Meanwhile he would 
guard his Family’s empire^ earn the respect of his father, and, 
since the position was not hereditary to an absolute degree, 
cement his claim as heir to the Corleone Empire. 

But the enemy was making its plans. They too had analysed 
the situation and had come to the conclusion that the only way 
to stave off complete defeat was to kill Sonny Corleone. They 
understood the situation better now and felt it was possible to 
negotiate with the Don, known for his logical reasonableness. 
They had come to hate Sonny for his bloodthirstiness, which 
they considered barbaric. Also not good business sense. No- 
body wanted the old days back again with all its turmoil and 
trouble. 

One evening Connie Corleone received an anonymous phone 
call, a girl’s voice, asking for Carlo. "Who is this?’ Connie 
asked. 

The girl on the other end giggled and said, ‘Fm a friend of 
Carlo’s. I just wanted to tell him I can’t sec him tonight. I have 
to go out of town.’ 

^You lousy bitch,* Connie Corleone said. She screamed it 
again into the phone. ‘You lousy tramp bitch.’ There was a 
click on the other end. 

Carlo had gone to the track for that afternoon and when he 
came home in the late evening he was sore at losing and half 
drunk from the bottle he always carried. As soon as he stepped 
into the door, Connie started screaming curses at him. He 
ignored her and went in to take a shower. When he came out 
he dried his naked body in front of her and started dolling up 
to go out. 

Connie stood with hands on hips, her face pointy and white 
with rage. ‘You’re not going any place,’ she said. ‘Your girl- 
friend called and said she can’t make it tonight. You lousy 
bastard, you have the nerve to give your whores my phone 
number. I’ll kill you, you bastard.’ She rushed at him, kicking 
and scratching. 

He held her oflf with one muscular forearm. ‘ You’re crazy,' 
he said coldly. But she could see he was worried, as if he knew 

*65 



the or azy girl he was screwing would actually pull such a stunt. 
*She was kidding around, some nut/ Carlo said. 

Connie ducked around his arm and clawed at his face. She 
got a little bit of his cheek under her fingernails. With sur- 
prising patience he pushed her away. She noticed he was careful 
because of her pregnancy and that gave her the courage to feed 
her rage. She was also excited. Pretty soon she wouldn’t be 
able to do anything, the doctor had said no sex for the last two 
months and she wanted it, before the last two months started. 
Yet her wish to inflict a physical injilry on Carlo was very real 
too. She followed him into the bedroom. 

She could see he was scared and that filled her with con- 
temptuous delight. ‘You’re staying home,’ she said, ‘you’re 
not going out.’ 

‘OK, OK,’ he said. He was still undressed, only wearing 
his shorts. He liked to go around the house like that, he was 
proud of his V-shaped body, the golden skin. Connie looked 
at him hungrily. He tried to laugh. ‘You gonna give me some- 
thing to eat at least?’ 

That mollified her, his calling on her duties, one of them 
at least. She was a good cook, she had learned that from 
her mother. She sauteed veal and peppers, preparing a mixed 
salad while the pan simmered. Meanwhile Carlo stretched 
out on his bed to read the next day’s racing form. He had a 
water glass full of whisky beside him which he kept sipping 
at. 

Connie came into the bedroom. She stood in the doorway as 
if she could not come close to the bed without being invited. 
‘The food is on the table,’ she said. 

‘I’m not hungry yet,’ he said, still reading the racing form. 

‘It’s on the table,’ Connie said stubbornly. 

‘Stick it up your ass/ Carlo said. He drank off the rest of the 
whisky in the water glass, tilted the bottle to fill it again. He 
paid no more attention to her. 

Connie went into the kitchen, picked up the plates filled with 
food and smashed them against the sink. The loud crashes 
brought Carlo in from the bedroom. He looked at the greasy 
veal and peppers splattered all over the kitchen walls and his 
finicky neatness was outraged. ‘You filthy guinea spoiled brat,’ 

266 



he said venomously. ‘Qean that up right now or Pll kick the 
shit out of you/ 

'Like hell I will/ Connie said. She held her hands like claws 
ready to scratch his bare chest to ribbons. 

Carlo went back into the bedroom and when he came out he 
was holding his belt doubled in his hand. ‘ Qean it up/ he said 
and there was no mistaking the menace in his voice. She stood 
there not moving and he swung the belt against her heavily 
padded hips, the leather stinging but not really hurting. Con- 
nie retreated to tlie kitchen cabinets and her hand went into 
one of the drawers to haul out the long bread knife. She held 
it ready. 

Carlo laughed. * Even the female Corleones are murderers/ 
he said. He put the belt down on the kitchen table and ad- 
vanced towards her. She tried a sudden lunge but her pregnant 
heavy body made her slow and he eluded the thrust she aimed 
at his groin in such deadly earnest. He disarmed her easily and 
then he started to slap her face with a slow medium-heavy 
stroke so as not to break the skin. He hit her again and again 
as she retreated around the kitchen table trying to escape him 
and he pursued her into the bedroom. She tried to bite his hand 
and he grabbed her by the hair to lift her head up. He slapped 
her face until she began to weep like a little girl, with pain and 
humiliation. Then he threw her contemptuously on to the bed. 
He drank from the bottle of whisky still on the night table. He 
seemed very drunk now, his light blue eyes had a crazy glint in 
them and finally Connie was truly afraid. 

Carlo straddled his legs apart and drank from the bottle. He 
reached down and grabbed a chunk of her pregnapt heavy 
thigh in his hand. He squeezed very hard, hurting her and mak- 
ing her beg for mercy. ‘ You^rc fat as a pig,' he said with dis- 
gust and walked out of the bedroom. 

Thoroughly frightened and cowed, she lay on the bed, not 
daring to see what her husband was doing in the other room. 
Finally she rose and went to the door to peer into the living 
room. Carlo had opened a fresh bottle of whisky and was 
sprawled on the sofa. In a little while he would drink himself 
into sodden sleep and she could sneak into the kitchen and call 
her family in Long Beach. She would tell her mother to send 

267 



someone out here to get her. She just hoped Sonny didn’t 
answer the phone, she knew it would be best to talk to Tom 
Hagen or her mother. 

It was nearly ten o’clock at night when the kitchen phone in 
Don Corleone’s house rang. It was answered by one of the 
Don’s bodyguards who dutifully turned the phone over to 
Connie’s mother. But Mrs Corleonc could hardly understand 
what her daughter was saying, the girl was hysterical yet trying 
to whisper so that her husband in the next room would not 
hear her. Also her face had become swollen because of the 
slaps, and her puffy lips thickened her speech. Mrs Corleone 
made a sign to the bodyguard that he should call Sonny, who 
was in the living room with Tom Hagen, 

Sonny came into the kitchen and took the phone from his 
mother. ‘Yeah, Connie,’ he said. 

Connie was so frightened hoth of her husband and of what 
her brother would do that her sf eech became worse. She bab- 
bled, ‘Sonny, just send a car to bring me home. I’ll tell you 
then, it’s nothing. Sonny. Don’t you come. Send Tom, please, 
Sonny. It’s nothing. I just want to come home.’ 

By this time Hagen had come into the room. The Don was 
already under a sedated sleep in the bedroom above and Hagen 
wanted to keep an eye on Sonny in all crises. The two interior 
bodyguards were also in the kitchen. Everybody was watching 
Sonny as he listened on the phone. 

There was no question that the violence in Sonny Corleone’s 
nature rose from some deep mysterious physical Well. As they 
watched they could actually see the blood rushing to his heavily 
corded neck, could sec the eyes film with hatred, the separate 
features of his face tightening, growing pinched, then his £ice 
took on the greyish hue of a sick man fighting o& some sort 
of death, except that the adrenaline pumping through his body 
made his hands tremble. But his voice was controlled, pitched 
low, as he told his sister, ‘You wait there. You just wait there.’ 
He hung up the phone. 

He stood there for a moment quite stunned with his pwn 
rage, then he said, ‘The fucking sonofabitch, jthe fucking soo- 
ofabitch.’ He ran out of the house, 

Hagen knew the look on Sonny’s face, all reasoning power 

268 



had left him. At this moment Sonny was capable of anything. 
Hagen also knew that the ride into the city would cool Sonny 
off, make him more rational. But that rationality might make 
him even more dangerous, though the rationality would en- 
able him to protect himself against the consequences of his 
rage. Hagen heard the car motor roaring into life and he said 
to the two bodyguards, ‘Go after him.* 

Then he went to the phone and made some calls. He ar- 
ranged for some men of Sonny*s reffme living in the city to go 
up to Carlo Rizzi’s apartment and get Carlo out of there. Other 
men would stay with Connie until Sonny arrived. He was tak- 
ing a chance, thwarting Sonny, but he knew the Don would 
back him up. He was afraid that Sonny might kill Carlo in 
ftont of witnesses. He did not expect trouble ftom the enemy. 
The Five Families had been quiet too long and obviously were 
looking for peace of some kind. 

By the time Sonny roared out of the mall in his Buick,* he 
had already regained, partly, his senses. He noted the two bc^y- 
guatds getting into a car to follow him and approved. He ex- 
pected no danger, the Five Families had quit counterattacking, 
were not really fighting any more. He had grabbed his jacket 
in the foyer and there was a gun in a secret dashboard com- 
partment of the car, the car registered in the name of a member 
his regime^ so that he personally could not get into any legal 
trouble. But he did not anticipate needing any weapon. He did 
not even know what he was going to do with Carlo Rizzi. 

Now that he had a chance to think. Sonny knew he could 
not kill the father of an unborn child, and that father his sister’s 
husband. Not over a domestic spat. Except that it <iot just 
a domestic spat. Carlo was a bad guy and Sonny felt responsible 
that his sister had met the bastard through him. 

The paradox in Sonny’s violent nature was that he could not 
hit a woman and had never done so. That he could not harm 
a child or anything helpless. When Carlo had refused to fight 
back against him that cky, it had kept Sonny from killing him^ 
complete submission disarmed his violence. As a boy, he had 
been truly tenderhearted. That he had become a murderer as a 
man was simply his destiny. 

But he would settle this thing once and for all. Sonny 



thought, as he headed the Buick towards the causeway that 
would take him over the water from Long Beach to the park- 
ways on the other side of Jones Beach. He always used this 
route when he went to New York. There was less traHic. 

He decided he would send Connie home with the body- 
guards and then he would have a session with his brother-in- 
law. What would happen after that he didn’t know. If the 
bastard had really hurt Connie, he’d make a cripple out of the 
bastard. But the wind coming over the causeway, the salty 
freshness of the air, cooled his anger. He put the window down 
all the way. 

He had taken the Jones Beach Causeway, as always, because 
it was usually deserted this time of night, at this time of year, 
and he could speed recklessly until he hit the parkways on the 
other side. And even there traffic would be light. The release 
of driving very fast would help dissipate what he knew was a 
dangerous tension. He had already left his bodyguards’ car 
far behind. 

The causeway was badly lit, there was not a single car. Far 
ahead he saw the white cone of the manned tollbooth. There 
were other tollbooths beside it but they were staffed only dur- 
ing the day, for heavier traffic. Sonny started braking the 
Buick and at the same time searched his pockets for change. 
He had none. He reached for his wallet, flipped it open with 
one hand and fingered out a bill. He came within the arcade 
of light and he saw to his mild surprise a car in the tollbooth 
slot blocking it, the driver obviously asking some sort of 
directions from the toll taker. Sonny honked his horn and the 
other car obediently rolled through to let his car slide into the 
slot., 

Sonny handed the toll taker the dollar biU and waited for his 
change. He was in a hurry now to close the window. The 
Atlantic Ocean air had chilled the whole car. But the toll taker 
was fumbling with his change; the dumb son of a bitch actually 
dropped it. Head and body disappeared as the toll man stooped 
down in his booth to pick up the money. 

At that moment Sonny noticed that ^e other car had not 
kept going but had parked a few feet ahead, still blocking his 
way. At that same moment his lateral vision caught sight of 


270 



another man in the darkened tollbooth to his right. But he 
did not have time to think about that because two men came 
out of the car parked in front and walked towards him. The 
toll collector still had not appeared. And then in the fraction 
of a second before anything actually happened, Santino Cor- 
leone knew he was a dead man. And in that moment his mind 
was lucid, drained of all violence, as if the hidden fear finally 
real and present had purified him. 

Even so, his huge body in a reflex for life, crashed through 
the Buick door, bursting its lock. The man in the darkened 
tollbooth opened fire and the shots caught Sonny Corleone in 
the head and neck as his massive frame spilled out of the car. 
The two men in front held up their guns now, the man in the 
darkened tollbooth cut his fire, and Sonny’s body sprawled on 
the asphalt with the legs still partly inside. The two men each 
fired shots into Sonny’s body, then kicked him in the face to 
disfigure his features even more, to show a mark made by 
a more personal human power. 

Seconds afterwards, all four men, the three actual assassins 
and the bogus toll collector, were in their car and speeding 
towards the Meadowbrook Parkway on the other side of Jones 
Beach. Their pursuit was blocked by Sonny’s car and body in 
the tollgate slot but when Soimy’s bodyguards pulled up a few 
minutes later and saw his body lying there, they had no in- 
tention to pursue. They swung their car around in a huge arc 
and returned to Long Beach. At the first public phone off the 
causeway one of them hopped out and called Tom Hagen. He 
was very curt and very brisk. ‘ Sonny’s dead, they got him at 
the Jones Beach toll.’ 

Hagen’s voice was perfectly calm. ‘OK,’ he said. ‘Go to 
Qemenza’s house and tell him to come here right away. He’D 
tell you what to do,’ 

Hagen had taken the call in the kitchen, with Mama Cor- 
leonc bustling around preparing a snack for the arrival of her 
daughter. He had kept his composure and the old woman had 
not noticed anything amiss. Not that she could not have, if she 
wanted to, but in her life with the Don she had learned it was 
fu: wiser not to perceive. That if it was necessary to know any- 
thing painful, it would be told to her soon enough. And if it 


* 7 * 



Wft8 a pain that could be spared her, she could do without. She 
was quite content not to share the pain of her men, after all 
did they share the pain of women? Impassively she boiled her 
coffee and set the tablf with food. In her experience pain and 
fear did not dull physical hunger; in her experience the taking of 
food dulled pain. She would have beeh outraged if a doctor had 
tried to sedate her with a drug, but coffee and a crust of bread 
were another matter; she came, of course, from a more primi- 
tive culture. 

And so she let Tom Hagen escape to his corner conference 
room and once in that room, Hagen began to tremble so 
violently he had to sit down with his legs squeezed together, 
his head hunched into his contracted shoulders, hands dasped 
together between his knees as if he were praying to the devil. 

He was, he knew now, no fit Consigliort for a Family at war. 
He had been fooled, faked out, by the Five Families and their 
seeming timidity. They had remained quiet, laying their terrible 
ambush. They had planned and waited, holding their bloody 
hands no matter what provocation they had been given. They 
had waited to land one terrible blow. And they had. Old 
Genco Abbandando would never have fallen for it, he would 
have smelled a rat, he would have smoked them out, tripled 
his precautions. And through all this Hagen felt his grief. Sonoy 
had been his true brother, his saviour; his hero when they had 
been boys together. Sonny had never been mean or bullying 
with him, had always treated him with affection, had taken him 
in his arms when SoUozzo had turned him loose. Sonny’s joy 
at that reunion had been real. That he had grown up to be a 
cruel and violent and bloody man was, for Hagen, not relevant. 

H^ had walked out of the kitchen because he knew he could 
never tell Mama Corleone about her son’s death. He had never 
thought of her as his mother as he thought of the Don as his 
father and Sonny as his brother. His affection for her was like 
his affection for Freddie and Michael and Connie. The affec- 
tion for someone who has been kind but not loving. But he 
could not tell her. In a few short months she had lost all her 
sons; Freddie exiled to Nevada, Michael hiding for his life in 
Sicily, and now Santino dead. Which of the three had she loved 
most of aU? She had never shown. 


* 7 * 



It was flo more than a few minutes. Hagen got control of 
himself again and picked up the phone. He called Connie’s 
number. It tang for a long time b^ore Connie answered in a 
whisper. 

Hagen spoke to her gently. ‘Connie, this is Tom. Wake your 
husband up, I have to talk to him.’ 

Connie said in a low frightened voice, ‘ Tom, is Sonny com- 
ing here?* 

‘No,’ Hagen said. ‘Sonny’s not coming there. Don’t worry 
about that. Just wake Carlo up and tell him it’s very important 
1 jpeak to Hm.’ 

Connie’s voice was weepy. ‘Tom, he beat me up, I’m afraid 
he’ll hurt me again if he Imows I called home.’ 

Hagen said gently, ‘He won’t. He’ll talk to me and I’ll 
straighten him out. Everything will be OK. TeU him it’s very 
important, very, very important he comes to the phone. OK?’ 

It was almost five minutes before Carlo’s voice came over 
the phone, a voice half slurred by whisky and sleep. Hagen 
spoke sharply to make him alert. 

‘Listen, Carlo,* he said, ‘I’m going to tell you something 
very shocking. Now prepare yourself because when I tell it to 
you I want you to answer me very casually as if it’s less than it 
is. I told Connie it was important so you have to give her a 
story. Tell her the Family has decided to move you both to 
one of the houses in the mall and to give you a big job. That 
the Don has finally decided to give you a chance in the hope of 
making your home life better. You got that?’ 

There was a hopeful note in Carlo’s voice as he answered, 
‘Yeah, OK.’ 

Hagen went on, ‘In a few minutes a couple oFmy men are 
going to knock on your door to take you away with them. Tell 
them I want them to call me first. Just tell them that. Don’t say 
anything else. I’ll instruct them to leave you there with Connie. 
OK?’ 

‘Yeah, yeah, I got it,’ Carlo said. His voice was excited. The 
tension in Hagen’s voice seemed to have finally alerted him 
that the news coming up was going to be really important. 

Hagen gave it to him straight. ‘They killed Sonny tonight. 
Don’t say anything. Connie called him while you were asleep 


^75 



and he was on his way over there, but I don’t want her to know 
that, even if she guesses it, 1 dpn’t want her to know it for sure. 
She’ll start thinking it’s ail her fault. Now I want you to stay 
with her tonight and not tell her anything. I want you to make 
up with her. I want you to be the perfect loving husband. And 
I want you to stay that way until she has her baby at least. 
Tomorrow morning somebody, maybe you, maybe the Don, 
maybe her mother, will tell Connie that her brother got kiUed. 
And I want you by her side. Do me this favour and I’ll take 
care of you in the times to come. You got that?’ 

Carlo’s voice was a little shaky. ‘ Sure, Tom, sure. Listen, me 
and you always got along. I’m grateful. Understand?’ 

‘Yeah,* Hagen said. ‘Nobody will blame your fight with 
Connie for causing this, don’t worry about that. I’ll take care 
of that.’ He paused and softly, encouragingly, ‘Go ahead now, 
take care of Connie.’ He broke the connexion. 

He had learned never to make a threat, the Don had taught 
him that, but Carlo had got the message all right : he was a hair 
away from death. 

Hagen made another call to Tessio, telling him to come to 
the mail in Long Beach immediately. He didn’t say why and 
Tessio did not ask. Hagen sighed. Now would come the part 
he dreaded. 

He would have to waken the Don from his drugged slumber. 
He would have to tell the man he most loved in the world that 
he had failed him, that he had failed to guard his domain and 
the life of his eldest son. He would have to tell the Don every- 
thing was lost unless the sick man himself could enter the 
battle. For Hagen did not delude himself. Only the great Don 
himself could snatch even a stalemate from this terrible defeat. 
Hagen didn’t even bother checking with Don Corleone’s doc- 
tors, it would be to no purpose. No matter what the doctors 
ordered, even if they told him that the Don could not rise 
from his sickbed on pain of death, he must tell his adopted 
father and then follow him. And of course there was no ques- 
tion about what the Don would do. The opinions of medical 
men were irrelevant now, everything was irrelevant now. The 
Don must be told and he must either take command or order 
Hagen to surrender the Corleone power to the Five Families. 


*74 



And yet with all his heart, Hagen dreaded the next hour. He 
tried to prepare his own manner. He would have to be in all 
ways strict with his own guilt. To reproach himself would only 
add to the Don’s burden. To point out his own shortcomings 
as a wartime Citnsiglioriy would only make the Don reproach 
himself for his own bad judgement for picking such a man for 
such an important post. 

He must, Hagen knew, tell the news, present his analysis of 
what must be done to rectify the situation and then keep 
silent. His reactions thereafter must be the reactions invited by 
his Don. If the Don wanted him to show guilt, he would show 
guilt; if the Don invited grief, he would lay bare his genuine 
sorrow. 

Hagen lifted his head at the sound of motors, cars rolling up 
on to the mall. The caporepmes were arriving. He would bti^ 
them £rst and then he would go up and wake Don G>rleone. 
He got up and went to the liquor cabinet by the desk and took 
out a glass and bottle. He stood there for a moment so un- 
nerved he could not pour the liquid from bottle to glass. Be- 
hind him, he heard the door to the room close sofdy and, 
turning, he saw, fully dressed for the first time since he had 
been shot, Don Corlcone. 

The Don walked across the room to his huge leather arm- 
chair and sat down. He walked a little stiffly, his clothes hung 
a little loosely on his frame but to Hagen’s eyes he looked the 
same as always. It was almost as if by his will alone the Don 
had discarded all external evidence of his still weakened frame. 
His face was sternly set with all its old force and strength. He 
sat straight in the armchair and he said to Hagen, *Give me a 
drop of anisette.’ 

Hagen switched bottles and poured them both a portion of 
the fiery, liquorice-tasting alcohol. It was peasant, homemade 
stuff, much stronger than that sold in stores, the gift of an old 
friend who every year presented the Don with a small truck- 
load. 

* My wife was weeping before she fell asleep,’ Don G>rleone 
said. * Outside my window I saw my eapor^gimis coming to the 
house and it is midnight. So, Cansigliori of mine, I think you 
should tell your Don what everyone knows.’ 


*75 



Hagen said quietly. * I didn't tell Mama anything. I was about 
to come up and wake you and tell you the news myself. In 
another moment 1 would have come to waken you.’ 

Don Corlcone said impassively, ‘But you needed a drink 
first.’ 

‘Yes,’ Hagen said. 

‘You’ve had your drink,* the Don said. ‘You can tell me 
now'.* There was just the faintest hint of reproach for Hagen’s 
weakness. 

‘ They shot Sonny on the causeway,’ Hagen said. ‘ He’s dead.’ 

Don Q)rleone blinked. For just the fraction of a second the 
wall of his will disintegrated and the draining of his physical 
strength was plain on his face. Then he recovered. 

He clasped his hands in front of him on top of the desk and 
looked directly int6 Hagen’s eyes. ‘Tell me everything that 
happened,* he said. He held up one of his hands. ‘No, wait until 
Qemen2a and Tessio arrive so you won’t have to tell it all 
again.* 

It was only a few moments later that the two caportgimts 
were escorted into the room by a bodyguard. They saw at once 
that the Don knew about his son’s death because the Don stood 
up to receive them. They embraced him as old comrades were 
permitted to do. They all had a drink of anisette which Hagen 
poured them before he told them the story of that night. 

Don Corleone asked only one question at the end. ‘Is it 
certain my son is dead?* 

Qemen2a answered. ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘The bodyguards were 
of Santino’s regime but picked by me. I questioned them when 
they came to my house. They saw his body in the light of the 
tollhouse. He could not live with the wounds they saw. They 
place their lives in forfeit for w'hat they say.* 

Don Corleone accepted this final verdict without any sign of 
emotion except for a few moments of silence. Then he said, 
‘None of you are to concern yourselves with this affair. None 
of you are to commit any acts of vengeance, none of you are to 
make any inquiries to track down the murderers of my son 
without my express command. There will be no further acts 
of war against the Five Families without my express and per- 
sonal wish. Our Family will cease ail business operations and 

176 



cease to protect any of our business operations until after my 
son’s funeral. Then we will meet here again and decide what 
must be done. Tonight we must do what we can for Santino, 
we must bury him as a Christian. I will have friends of mine 
arrange things with the police and all other proper authorities. 
Clemenza, you will remain with me at all times as my body- 
guard, you and the men of your regime. Tessio, you will guard 
aU other members of my Family. Tom, I want you to call 
Amerigo Bonasera and tell him I will need his services at some 
time during this night. To wait for me at his establishment. It 
may be an hour, two hours, three hours. Do you aU under- 
stand that?’ 

The three men nodded. Don Corleone said, ‘Qemen 2 a, get 
some men and cars and wait for me. 1 will be ready in a few 
minutes. Tom, you did well. In the morning I want Con- 
stanzia with her mother. Make arrangements for her and her 
husband to live in the mall. Have Sandra’s friends, the women, 
go to her house to stay with her. My wife wiU go there also 
when I have spoken with her. My wife will tell her the mis- 
fortune and the women will arrange for the church to say their 
masses and pray for his soul.’ 

The Don got up from his leather armchair. The other men 
rose with him and Oemenza and Tessio embraced him again. 
Hagen held the door open for the Don, who paused to look at 
him for a moment. Then the Don put his hand on Hagen’s 
cheek, embraced him quickly, and said, in Italian, ‘You’ve 
been a gdod son. You comfort me.’ Telling Hagen that he had 
acted properly in this terrible time. The Don went up to his 
bedroom to speak to his wife. It was then that Hagen made the 
call to Amerigo Bonasera for the undertaker to redeem the 
favour he owed to the Corleones. 


*77 



Book V 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

The death of Santino Corleone sent shock waves through 
the underworld of the nation. And when it became known that 
Don Corleone had risen from his sick bed to take charge of the 
Family affairs, when spies at the funeral reported that the Don 
seemed to be fully recovered, the heads of the Five Families 
made frantic efforts to prepare a defence against the bloody 
retaliatory war that was sure to follow. Nobody made the 
mistake of assuming that Don Corleone could be held cheaply 
because of his past misfortunes. He was a man who had made 
only a few mistakes in his career and had learned from every 
one of them. 

Only Hagen guessed the Don^s real intentions and was not 
surprised when emissaries were sent to the Five Families to 
propose a peace. Not only to propose a peace but a meeting of 
all the Families in the city and with invitations to Families all 
over the United States to attend. Since the New York Families 
were the most powerful in the country, it was understood that 
their welfare affected the welfare of the country as a whole. 

At first there were suspicions. Was Don Corleone preparing 
a trap? Was he trying to throw his enemies off their guard? 
Was he attempting to prepare a wholesale massacre to avenge 
his son? But Don Corleone soon made it clear that he was 
sincere. Not only did he involve all the Families in the country 
in this meeting, but made no move to put his own people on 
a war footing or to enlist allies. And then he took the final 
irrevocable step that established the authenticity of these in- 
tentions and assured the safety of the grand council to be 
assembled. He called on the services of the Bocchicchio 
Family. 

The Bocchicchio Family was unique in that, once a parti- 
cularly ferocious branch of the Mafia in Sicily, it had become 

Z7« 



an instrument of peace in America. Once a group of men who 
earned their living by a savage determination, they now earned 
their living in what perhaps could be called a saintly fashion. 
The Bocchicchios’ one asset was a closely knit structure of 
blood relationships, a family loyalty severe even for a society 
where family loyalty came before loyalty to a wife. 

The Bocchicchio Family, extending out to third cousins, 
had once numbered nearly two hundred when they ruled the 
particular economy of a small section of southern Sicily. The 
income for the entire family then came from four or five flour 
mills, by no means owned communaUy, but assuring labour 
and bread and a minimal security for all Family members. This 
was enough, with intermarriages, for them to present a com- 
mon front against their enemies. 

No competing mill, no dam, that would create a water sup- 
ply to their competitors or ruin their own selling of water, was 
allowed to be built in their corner of Sicily. A powerful land- 
owning baron once tried to erect his own mill strictly for his 
personal use. The mill was burned down. He called on the 
carahineri and higher authorities, who arrested three of the 
Bocchicchio Family. Even before the trial the manor house of 
the baron was torched. The indictment and accusations were 
withdrawn. A few months later one of the highest functionaries 
in the Italian government arrived in Sicily and tried to solve 
the chronic water shortage of that island by proposing a huge 
dam. Engineers arrived from Rome to do surveys while 
watched by grim natives, members of the Bocchicchio clan. 
Police flooded the area, housed in a speciaUy built barracks. 

It looked like nothing could stop the dam from being built 
and supplies and equipment had actually been unloaded in 
Palermo. That was as far as they got. The Bocchicchios had 
contacted fellow Mafia chiefs and extracted agreements for 
their aid. The heavy equipment was sabotaged, the lighter 
equipment stolen. Mafia deputies in the Italian Parliament 
launched a bureaucratic counterattack against the planners. 
This went on for several years and in that time Mussolini came 
to power. The dictator decreed that the dam must be built. It 
was not. The dictator had known that the Mafia would be a 
threat to his regime, forming what amoimted to a separate 


^79 



authority from his own. He gave full powers to a high poUoe 
official, who promptly solved the problem by throwing every* 
body into jail or deporting them to penal work islands. In a 
few short years he had broken the power of the Mafia, simply 
by arbitrarily arresting anyone esren suspected of being a 
mafioso. And so also brought ruin to a great many innocent 
families. 

The Bocchicchios had been rash enough to resort to force 
against this unlimited power. Half of the men were killed in 
armed combat, the other half deported to penal island 
colonies. There were only a handful left when arrangements 
were made for them to emigrate to America via the clandestine 
underground route of jumping ship through Canada. There 
were almost twenty immigrants and they settled in a small 
town not far from New York City, in the Hudson Valley, 
where by starting at the very bottom they worked their way 
Up to owning a garbage hauling firm and their own trucks, 
lliey became prosperous because they had no competition. 
They had no competition because competitors found their 
trucks burned and sabotaged. One persistent fellow who under- 
cut prices was found buried in the garbage he had picked up 
during the day, smothered to death. 

But as the men married, to Sicilian girls, needless to say, 
children came, and the garbage business though providing a 
living, was not really enough to pay for the finer things 
America had to offer. And so, as a diversification, the Bocchic- 
chio Family became negotiators and hostages in the peace 
efforts of warring Mafia families. 

A strain of stupidity ran through the Bocchicchio clan, or 
perhaps they were just primitive. In any case they recogniaed 
their limitations and knew they could not compete with other 
Mafia families in the struggle to organize and control more 
sophisticated business structures like prostitution, gambling, 
dope, and public fraud, lliey were straight-from-the-shoulder 
people who could offer a gift to an ordinary patrolman but 
did not know how to approach a political bagman. They had 
only two assets. Their honour and their ferocity. 

A Bocchicchio never lied, never committ^ an act of 
treachery. Such behaviour was too complicated. Also, a 

280 



Bocchicchio never forgot an injury and never left it un- 
avenged no matter what the cost. And so by accident they 
stumbled into what would prove to be their most lucrative 
profession. 

When warring families wanted to make peace and arrange a 
parley, the Bocchicchio clan was contacted. The head of the 
clan would handle the initial negotiations and arrange for the 
necessary hostages. For instance, when Michael had gone to 
meet Sollozao, a Bocchicchio had been left with the G^rleone 
Family as surety for Michael’s safety, the service paid for by 
S0II0220. If Michael were killed by S0II0220, then the Boc- 
chicchio male hostage held by the ^rleone Family would be 
killed by the Corleones. In this case the Bocchicchios would 
take their vengeance on Sollozzo as the cause of their clans- 
man’s death. Since the Bocchicchios were so primitive, they 
never let anything, any kind of punishment, stand in their way 
of vengeance. They would give up their own lives and there 
was no protection against them if they were betrayed. A 
Bocchicchio hostage was gilt-edged insurance. 

And so now when Don Corleone employed the Bocchicchios 
as negotiators and arranged for them to supply hostages for all 
the Families to come to the peace meeting, there could be no 
question as to his sincerity. There could be no question of 
treachery. The meeting would be as safe as a wedding. 

Hostages given, the meeting took place in the director’s 
conference room of a small commercial bank whose president 
was indebted to Don Corleone and indeed some of whose stock 
belonged to Don Corleone though it was in the president’s 
name. The president always treasured that moment when he 
had offered to give Don Corleone a written document proving 
his ownership of the shares, to preclude any treachery. Don 
Corleone had been horrified. ’I would trust you with my whole 
fortune,’ he told the president. ‘I would trust you with my 
life and the welfare of my children. It is inconceivable to me 
that you would ever trick me or otherwise betray me. My 
whole world, all my faith in my judgement of human character 
would collapse. Of course I l^ve my own written records so 
that if something should happen to me my heirs would know 
that you hold something in trust for the^ But I know that 

aSx 



even if I were not here in this world to guard the interests of 
my children, you would be faithful to their needs.* 

The president of the bank, though not Sicilian, was a man of 
tender sensibilities. He understood the Don perfectly. Now 
the Godfather’s request was the president’s command and so 
on a Saturday afternoon, the executive suite of the bank, the 
conference room with its deep leather chairs, its absolute 
privacy, was made available to the Families. 

Security at the bank was taken over by a small army of hand* 
picked men wearing bank guard uniforms. At ten o’clock on a 
Saturday morning the conference room began to fill up. Be- 
sides the Five Families of New York, there were representa- 
tives from ten other Families across the country, with the 
exception of Chicago, that black sheep of their world. They 
had given up trying to civilixe Chicago, and they saw no point 
in including those mad dogs in this important conference. 

A bar had been set up and a small buffet. Each representative 
to the conference had been allowed one aide. Most of the Dons 
had brought their Consigltoris as aides so there were compara- 
tively few young men in the room. Tom Hagen was one of 
those young men and the only one who was not Sicilian. He 
was an object of curiosity, a freak. 

Hagen knew his manners. He did not speak, he did not 
smile. He waited on his boss, Don Corleonc, with all the res- 
pect of a favourite earl waiting on his king; bringing him a 
cold drink, lighting his cigar, positioning his ashtray; with 
respect but no obsequiousness. 

Hagen was the only one in that room who knew the identity 
of the portraits hanging on the dark panelled walls. They were 
mostly portraits of fabulous financial figures done in rich oils. 
One was of Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton. Hagen could 
not help thinking that Hamilton might have approved of this 
peace meeting being held in a banking institution. Nothing 
was more calming, more conducive to pure reason, than the 
atmosphere of money. 

The arrival time had been staggered for between nine-thirty 
to ten AM. Don Corleone, in a sense the host since he had 
initiated the peace talks, had been the first to arrive; one of his 
many virtues was punctuality. The next to arrive was Girlo 


aSa 



Ttamonti, who had made the southern part of the United 
States his territory. He was an impressively handsome middle- 
aged man, tall for a Sicilian, with a very deep sunburn, ex- 
quisitely tailored and barbered. He did not look Italian, he 
looked more like one of those pictures in the magazines of 
millionaire fishermen lolling on their yachts. The Tramonti 
Family earned its livelihood from gambling, and no one meet- 
ing their Don would ever guess with what ferocity he had won 
his empire. 

Emigrating from Sicily as a small boy, he had settled in 
Florida and grown to manhood there, employed by the 
American syndicate of Southern small-town politicians who 
controlled gambling. These were very tough men backed up 
by very tough police officials and they never suspected that 
they could be overthrown by such a greenhorn immigrant. 
They were unprepared for his ferocity and could not match it 
simply because the rewards being fought over were not, to 
their minds, worth so much bloodshed. Tramonti won over 
the police with bigger shares of the gross; he exterminated 
those redneck hooligans who ran their operation with such a 
complete lack of imagination. It was Tramonti who opened 
ties with Cuba and the Batista regime and eventually poured 
money into the pleasure resorts of Havana gambling houses, 
whorehouses, to lure gamblers from the American mainland, 
Tramonti was now a millionaire many times over and owned 
one of the most luxurious hotels in Miami Beach. 

When he came into the conference room followed by his 
aide, an equally sunburned Consigliori^ Tramonti embraced 
Don Corleone, made a face of sympathy to show he sorrowed 
for the dead son. 

Other Dons were arriving. They all knew each other, they 
had met over the years, either socially or when in the pursuit 
of their businesses. They had always showed each other 
professional courtesies and in their younger, leaner days had 
done each other little services. The second Don to arrive was 
Joseph Zaluchi from Detroit. The Zaluchi Family, under 
appropriate disguises and covers, owned one of the horse- 
racing tracks in the Detroit area. They also owned a good part 
of the gambling. Zaluchi was a moon-faced, amiable-looking 

283 



man who lived in a one-hundred-thousand-dollar house in the 
fashionable Grosse Point section of Detroit. One of his tons 
had maixied into an old, well-known American family. Zilr 
uchi, like Don Corleone, was sophisticated. Detroit had the 
lowest incidence of physical violence of any of the cities ooo- 
trolled by the Families; there had been only two executions In 
the last three years in that city. He disapproved of traffic in 
drugs. 

Zaluchi had brought his Consigliori with him and both men 
came to Don Corleone to embrace him. Zaluchi had a booming 
American voice with only the slightest trace of an accent. He 
was conservatively dressed, very businessman, and with a 
hearty goodwill to match. He said to Don Corleone, *Only 
your voice could have brought me here.' Don Corleone bowed 
his head in thanks. He could count on Zaluchi for support. 

The next two Dons to arrive were from the West Coast, 
motoring from there in the same car since they worked to- 
gether closely in any case. They were Frank Falcone and 
Anthony Molinari and both were younger than any of the 
other men who would come to the meeting; in their early 
forties. They were dressed a little more informally than the 
others, there was a touch of Hollywood in their style and they 
were a little more friendly than necessary. Frank Falcone con- 
trolled the movie unions and the gambling at the studios plus 
a complex of pipeline prostitution that supplied girls to the 
whorehouses of the states in the Far West. It was not in the 
realm of possibility for any Don to become ‘show biz' but 
Falcone had just a touch. His fellow Dons distrusted him 
accordingly. 

^thony Molinari controlled the waterfronts of San Fran- 
cisco and was pre-eminent in the empire of sports gambling. 
He came of Italian fishermen stock and owned the best San 
Francisco sea food restaurant, in which he took such pride 
that the legend had it he lost money on the enterprise by giving 
too good value for the prices charged. He had the impassive 
face of the professional gambler and it was known that he also 
had something to do with dope smuggling over the Mexican 
border and from the ships plying the lanes of the oriental 
oceans. Their aides were young, powerfully built men, ob- 

284 



viously not counsellors but bodyguards, though they would 
not dare to carry arms to this meeting. It was gener^ know- 
ledge that these bodyguards knew karate, a fact that amused 
the other Dons but did not alarm them in the slightest, no 
more than if the California Dons had come wearing amulets 
blessed by the Pope. Though it must be noted that some of 
these men were religious and believed in God. 

Next arrived the representative from the Family in Boston. 
This was the only Don who did not have the respect of his 
fcUows. He was known as a man who did not do right by his 
‘people’, who cheated them unmercifully. This could be for- 
given, each man measures his own greed. What could not be 
forgiven was that he could not keep order in his empire. The 
Boston area had too many murders, too many petty wars for 
power, too many unsupported freelance activities; it flouted 
the law too brazenly. If the Chicago Mafia were savages, then 
the Boston people were gavoones. or uncouth louts ; ruffians. 
The Boston Don’s name was Domenick Panza. He was short, 
squat; as one Don put it, he looked like a thief. 

The Cleveland syndicate, perhaps the most powerful of the 
strictly gambling operations in the United States, was repre- 
sented by a sensitive-looking elderly man with gaunt features 
and snow-white hair. He was known, of course not to his 
face, as ‘the Jew’ because he had surrounded himself with 
Jewish assistants rather than Sicilians. It w^as even rumoured 
that he would have named a Jew as his Consigliori if he had 
dared. In any case, as Don Corleone’s Family was known as 
the Irish Gang because of Hagen’s membership, so Don 
Vincent Forlenza’s Family was known as the Jewish Family 
with somewhat more accuracy. But he ran an extremely efficient 
organization and he w^as not known ever to have fainted at 
the sight of blood, despite his sensitive features. He ruled with 
an iron hand in a velvet political glove. 

The representatives of the Five Families of New York were 
the last to arrive and Tom Hagen was struck by how much 
more imposing, impressive, these five men were than the out- 
of-towners, the hicks. For one thing, the five New York Dons 
were in the old Sicilian tradition, they were ‘ tnen with a belly ’ 
meaning, figuratively, power and courage; and literally, 

285 



physical flesh, as if the two went together, as indeed they 
seemed to have done in Sicily, The five New York Dons were 
stout, corpulent men with massive leonine heads, features on a 
large scale, fleshy imperial noses, thick mouths, heavy folded 
cheeks. They were not too well tailored or barbetcd; they had 
the look of no-nonsense busy men without vanity. 

There was Anthony Stracci, who controlled the New Jersey 
area and the shipping on the West Side docks of Manhattan, 
He ran the gambling in Jersey and was very strong with the 
Democratic political machine. He had a fleet of freight hauling 
trucks that made him a fortune primarily because his trucks 
could travel with a heavy overload and not be stopped and 
fined by highway weight inspectors. These trucks helped ruin 
the highways and then his road-building Arm, with lucrative 
state contracts, repaired the damage wrought. It was the kind 
of operation that would warm any man*8 heart, business of 
itself creating more business, Stracci, too, was old-fashioned 
and never dealt in prostitution, but because his business was 
on the waterfront it was impossible for him not to be involved 
in the drug-smuggling trafHc. Of the five New York Families 
opposing the Corleones his was the least powerful but the 
most well disposed. 

The Family that controlled upper New York State, that 
arranged smuggling of Italian immigrants from Canada, all up- 
state gambling, and exercised veto power on state licensing of 
racing tracks, was headed by Ottilio Cuneo. This was a com- 
pletely disarming man with the face of a jolly round peasant 
baker, whose legitimate activity was one of the big milk com- 
panies. Cuneo was one of those men who loved children and 
carried a pocket full of sweets in the hopes of being able to 
pleasure one of his many grandchildren or the small oflspring 
of his associates. He wore a round fedora with the brim turned 
down all the way round like a woman’s sun hat, which broad- 
ened his already moon-shaped fiice into the mask of joviality. 
He was one of the few Dons who had never been arrested and 
whose true activities had never even been suspected. So much 
so that he had served on civic committees and had been voted 
as ‘Businessman of the Year for the State of New York’ by the 
Chamber of Commerce. 


zS6 



The closest ally to the Tattaglia Family was Don Emilio 
Barzini. He had some of the gambling in Brooklyn and some 
in Queens. He had some prostitution. He had strong-arm. He 
completely controlled Staten Island. He had some of the sports 
betting in the Bronx and Westchester. He was in narcotics. He 
had close ties to Qeveland and the West Coast and he was one 
of the few men shrewd enough to be interested in Las Vegas 
and Reno, the open cities of Nevada. He also had interests in 
Miami Beach and Cuba. After the Corleone Family, his was 
perhaps the strongest in New York and therefore in the coun- 
try. His influence reached even to Sicily. His hand was in every 
unlawful pie. He was even rumoured to have a toehold in 
Wall Street. He had supported the Tattaglia Family with 
money and influence since the start of the wai. It was his am- 
bition to supplant Don Corleone as the most powerful and 
respected Mafia leader in the country and to take over part 
of the Corleone empire. He was a man much like Don Coi- 
leone, but more modern, more sophisticated, more business- 
like. He could never be called an old Moustache Pete and he 
had the confidence of the newer, younger, brasher leaders on 
their way up. He was a man of great personal force in a cold 
way, with none of Don Corleone’s warmth and he was perhaps 
at this moment the most * respected’ man in the group. 

The last to arrive was Don Phillip Tattaglia, the head of the 
Tattaglia FamDy that had directly challenged the Corleone 
power by supporting Sollozzo, and had so nearly succeeded. 
And yet curiously enough he was held in a slight contempt by 
the others. For one things it was known that he had allowed 
himself to be dominated by Sollozzo, had in fact been led by 
the nose by that fine Turkish hand. He was held ^responsible 
for aU this commotion, this uproar that had so affected the 
conduct of everyday business by the New York Families. Also 
he was a sixty-year -old dandy and woman-chaser. And he had 
ample opportunity to indulge his weakness. 

For the Tattaglia Family dealt in women. Its main business 
was prostitution. It also controlled most of the nightclubs in 
the United States and could place any talent anywhere in the 
country. Phillip Tattaglia was not above using strong-atm to 
get control of promising singers and comics and muscling in 

287 



on record firms. But prostitution was the main source of the 
Family income. 

His personality was unpleasant to these men. He was a 
whiner, always complaining of the costs in his Family business. 
Laundry bills, all those towels, ate up the profits (but he owned 
the laundry firm that did the work). The girls were la2y and 
unstable, running off, committing suicide. The pimps were 
treacherous and dishonest aifd without a shred of loyalty. 
Good help was hard to find. Young lads of Sicilian blo<^ 
turned up their noses at such work, considered it beneath their 
honour to traffic and abuse women; those rascals who would 
slit a throat with a song on their lips and the cross of an Easter 
palm in the lapel of their jackets. So Phillip Tattaglia would 
rant on to audiences unsympathetic and contemptuous. His 
biggest howl was reserved for authorities who had it in their 
power to issue and cancel liquor licences for his nightclubs and 
cabarets. He swore he had made more millionaires than Wall 
Street with the money he had paid those thieving guardians of 
official seals. 

In a curious way his almost victorious war against the Cor- 
leone Family had not won him the respect it deserved. They 
knew his strength had come first from S0II0220 and then from 
the Barzini Family. Also the fact that with the advantage of 
surprise he had not Won complete victory was evidence against 
him. If he had been more efficient, all this trouble could have 
been avoided. The death of Don Corlcone would have meant 
the end of the war. 

It was proper, since they had both lost sons in their war 
against each other, that Don Corleone and Phillip Tattaglia 
shojuld acknowledge each other’s presence only with a formal 
nod. Don Corleone was the object of attention, the other men 
studying him to see what mark of weakness had been left On 
him by his wounds and defeats. The puzzling factor was why 
Don Corleone had sued for peace after the death of his fav- 
ourite son. It was an acknowledgement of defeat and would 
almost surely lead to a lessening of his power. But they would 
soon know. 

There were greetings, there were drinks to be served and 
almost another half hour went by before Don Corleone took 

288 



his scat at the polished walnut table. Unobtrusively, Hagra 
sat in thft rhflir slightly to the Don*s left and behind him. *llii8 
was signal for the other Dons to make their way to die 
table. Their aides sat behind them, the Consiglioris up close so 
they could offer any advice when needed. 

Don Corleone was the first to speak and he spoke as If 
nothing had happened. As if he had not been grievously 
wounded and his eldest son slain, his empire in a shambles, his 
personal family scattered, Freddie in the West and under the 
protection of the Molinari Family and Michael secreted so 
the wastelands of Sicily. He spoke naturally, in Sicilian dialect. 

‘I want to thank you all for coming,* he said. ‘ I consider it a 
service done to me personally and I am in the debt of each and 
every one of you. And so I will say at the beginning that 1 am 
here not to quarrel or convince, but only to reason and as a 
reasonable man do everything possible for us all to past 
friends here too. I give my word on that, and some of you who 
know me well know I do not give my word lighdy. Ah, well, 
let’s get down to business. We are all honourable men here, 
we don’t have to give each other assurances as if we were 
lawyers.’ 

He paused. None of the others spoke. Some were smoking 
cigars, others sipping their drinks. All of these men were good 
listeners, patient men. They had one other thing in common. 
They were those rarities, men who had refused to accept the 
rule of organized society, men who refused the domimon of 
other men. There was no force, no mortal man who could 
bend them to their will unless they wished it. They were inen 
who guarded their free will with wiles and murder. Their wills 
could be subverted only by death. Or the utmosfrcasonable- 
ness. 

Don Corleone sighed. ‘How did things ever go so far?’ he 
asked rhetorically. ‘Well, no matter. A lot of foolishness has 
come to pass. It was so unfortunate, so unnecessary. But let 
me tell what happened, as I see it.’ 

He paused to see if someone would object to his telling his 
side of the story. 

‘Thank God my health has been restored and maybe I can 
set this affair adght. Perhaps my son was too rash, too 

af9 


— 10 



headstrong, T don’t say no to that. Anyway let me just say that 
S0U0Z20 came to me with a business affair in which he asked 
me for my money and my influence. He said he had the interest 
of the Tattaglia Family. The affair involved drugs, in which I 
have no interest. I’m a quiet man and such endeavours are too 
lively for my taste. I explained this to Soliozzo, with all re- 
spect for him and the Tattaglia Family. I gave him my “no” 
with all courtesy. 1 told him his business would not interfere 
with mine, that I had no objection to his earning his living in 
this fashion. He took it ill and brought misfortune down on all 
our heads. Well, that’s life. Everyone here could tell his own 
talc of sorrow. That’s not to my purpose.’ 

Don Corleone paused and motioned to Hagen for a cold 
drink, which Hagen swiftly furnished him. Don Corleone wet 
his mouth. ‘I’m willing to make the peace,’ he said. ‘Tattaglia 
has lost a son, I have lost a son. W^e are quits. What would the 
world come to if people kept carrying grudges against all 
reason? That has been the cross of Sicily, where men are so 
busy with vendettas they have no time to earn bread for their 
families. It’s foolishness. So I say now, let things be as they 
were before. I have not taken any steps to learn who betrayed 
and killed my son. Given peace, I will not do so, I have a son 
who cannot come home and 1 must receive assurances (hat 
when 1 arrange matters so that he can return safely that there 
will be no interference, no danger from the authorities. Once 
that’s settled maybe we can talk about other matters that 
interest us and do ourselves, all of us, a profitable service 
today.’ Corleone gestured expressively, submissively, with his 
hands. ‘That is all I want.’ 

It was very well done. It was the Don Corleone of old. 
Reasonable. Pliant. Soft-spoken. But every man there had 
noted that he had claimed good health, which meant he was a 
man not to be held cheaply despite the misfortunes of the 
Corleone Family. It was noted that he had said the discussion 
of other business was useless until the peace he asked for was 
given. It was noted that he had asked for the old status quo, 
that he would lose nothing despite his having got the worst 
of it over the past year. 

However, it was Emilio Barzini who answered Don Cor- 

290 



leone, not Tattaglia. He was curt and to the point without 
being rude or insulting. 

*That is all true enough/ Barzini said. *But there’s a little 
more. Don Corleone is too modest. The fact is that Sollozzo 
and the Tattaglias could not go into their new business without 
the assistance of Don Corleone. In fact, his disapproval injured 
them. That’s not his fault of course. The fact remains that 
judges and politicians who would accept favours from Don 
Corleone, even on drugs, would not allow themselves to be 
influenced by anybody else w'hen it came to narcotics. Soh 
lozzo couldn’t operate if he didn’t have some insurance of his 
people being treated gendy. We all know that. We would all 
be poor men otherwise. And now that they have increased the 
penalties the judges and the prosecuting attorneys drive a hard 
bargain when one of our people gets in trouble with narcotics. 
Even a Sicilian sentenced to twenty years might break the 
omerta and talk his brains out. That can’t happen, Don Cor- 
leone controls all that apparatus. His refusal to let us use it is 
not the act of a friend. He takes the bread out of the mouths 
of our families. Times have changed, it’s not like the old days 
where everyone can go his own way. If Corleone has all the 
judges in New York, then he must share them or let us others 
use them. Certainly he can present a bill for such services, wc’rc 
not communists, after all. But he has to let us draw water 
from the well. It’s that simple.’ 

When Barzini had finished talking there was a silence. The 
lines were now drawn, there could be no return to the old 
status quo. What was more important was that Barzini by 
speaking out was saying that if peace was not m^e he would 
openly join the Tattaglia in their war against the Corleone. 
And he had scored a telling point. Their lives and their for- 
tunes depended upon their doing each other services, the 
denial of a favour asked by a friend was an act of aggression. 
Favours were not asked lightly and so could not be lightly 
refused. 

Don Corleone finally spoke to answer. ‘ My friends,’ he said, 
‘I didn’t refuse out of spite. You all know me. When have I 
ever refused an acconunodadon? That’s simply not in my 
nature. But I had to refuse this time. Why? Because I think 


291 



this drug business will destroy us in the years to come. There 
is too much strong feeling al^ut such traffic in this country. 
It*s not like whisky or gambling or even women which most 
people want and is forbidden them by the pev^i^pnovanU of the 
church and the government. But drugs are dangerous for 
everyone connected with them. It could jeopardize all other 
business. And let me say Tm flattered by the bdief that I am so 
powerful widi the judges and law officials, I wish it were true. 
I do have some influence but many of the people who respect 
my counsel might lose this respect if drugs become involved 
in our relationship. They are afraid to he involved in such 
business and they have strong feelings about it. Even police- 
men who help us in gambling and other things would refuse 
to help in drugs. So to ask me to perform a service in these 
matters is to ask me to do a disservice to myself. But Tm will- 
ing to do even that if all of you think it proper in order to 
adjust other matters.’ 

When Don ODrlcone had finished speaking the room be- 
came much more relaxed with more whisperings and cross 
talk. He had conceded the important point. He would ofler 
his protection to any organized business venture in drugs. He 
was, in effect, agreeing almost entirely to Sollozzo’s original 
proposal if that proposal was endorsed by the national group 
gathered here. It was understood that he would never parti- 
cipate in the operational phase, nor would he invest his money. 
He would merely use his protective influence with the legal 
apparatus. But this was a formidable concession. 

The Don of Los Angeles, Frank Falcone, spoke to answer. 
‘There’s no way of stopping our people from going into that 
business. They go in on their own and get in trouble. There’s 
too much money in it to resist.. So it’s more dangerous if we 
don’t go in. At least if we control it we can cover it better, 
organize it better, make sure it causes less trouble. Being in it 
is not so bad, there has to be control, there has to be protec- 
tion, there has to be organization, we can’t have everybody 
running around doing just what they please like a bunch of 
anarchists.’ 

The Don of Detroit, more fldendly to Codeone than any cf 
die ollicn, abo now against his fiieod’s posftkin, in Ac 





iiitetest of reasonableness. don^t believe in drugs/ he said. 
‘For years I paid my people extra so they woul^'t do that 
kind of business. But it didn’t matter, it didn’t help. Somebody 
comes to them and says, have powders, if you put up the 
three-, four-thousand-doUar investment we can make fifty 
thousand distributing.” Who can resist such a profit? And they 
are so busy with their little side business they neglect the work 
I pay them to do. There’s more money in drugs. It’s getting 
bigger all the time. There’s no way to stop it so we have to 
control the business and keep it respectable. I don’t want any 
of it near schools, I don’t want any of it sold to children. That 
is an infamita. In my city I would try to keep the traffic in the 
dark people, the coloured. They are the b^t customers, die 
least troublesome and they are animals anyway. They have no 
respect for their wives or their families or for themselves. Let 
them lose their souls with drugs. But something has to be done, 
we just can’t let people do as they please and make trouble £6r 
everyone.’ 

This speech of the Detroit Don was received with loud mur- 
murs of approval. He had hit the nail on the head. You couldn’t 
even pay people to stay out of the drug traffic. As for his re- 
marks about children, that was his well-known sensibility, his 
tenderheartedness speaking. After all, who would sell drugs to 
children? Where would children get the money? As for his 
remarks about the coloureds, tb^t was not even heard. The 
Negroes were considered of absolutely no account, of no force 
whatsoever. That they had allowed society to grind them into 
the dust proved them of no account and his mentioning them 
in any way proved that the Don of Detroit had a mind that 
always wavered towards irrelevancies. 

All the Dons spoke. All of them deplored the traffic in drugs 
as a bad thing that would cause trouble but agreed there was no 
way to control it. There was, simply, too much money to be 
made in the business, therefore it followed that there would be 
men who would dare anything to dabble in it. That was human 
nature. 

It was finally agreed. Drug traffic vrould be permitted and 
Don Corleone must give it some legal protection in the East. 
It understood that the Barzini and Tattaglia Families 


*93 



would do most of the large-scale operations. With this out of 
the way the conference was able to move on to other matters 
of a wider interest. There were many complex problems to be 
solved. It was agreed that Las Vegas and Miami were to be 
open cities where any of the Families could operate. They all 
recognized that these were the cities of the future. It was also 
agreed that no violence would be permitted in these cities and 
that petty criminals of all types were to be discouraged. It was 
agreed that in momentous affairs, in executions that were neces- 
sary but might cause too much of a public outcry, the execu- 
tion must be approved by this council. It was agreed that 
button men and other soldiers were to be restrained from 
violent crimes and acts of vengeance against each other on 
personal matters. It was agreed that Families would do each 
other services when requested, such as providing executioners, 
technical assistance in pursuing certain courses of action such 
as bribing jurors, which in some instances could be vital. These 
discussions, informal, colloquial, and on a high level, took time 
and were broken by lunch and drinks from the bufiet bar. 

Finally Don Barzini sought to bring the meeting to an end. 
‘That’s the whole matter then,’ he said. ‘We have the peace 
and let me pay my respects to Don G^rleonc, whom we all 
have known over the years as a man of his word. If there arc 
any more differences we can meet again, we need not become 
foolish again. On my part the road is new and fresh. I’m glad 
this is all settled.’ 

Only Phillip Tattaglia was a little worried still. The murder 
of Santino Corleone made him the most vulnerable person in 
this group if war broke out again. He spoke at length for the 
first time. 

‘I’ve agreed to everything here. I’m willing to forget my 
own misfortune. But I would like to hear some strict assur- 
ances from Corleone. WiU he attempt any individual ven- 
geance? When time goes by and his position perhaps becomes 
stronger, will he forget that we have sworn our friendship? 
How am I to know that in three or four years he won’t feel 
that he’s been ill served^ forced against his will to this agree- 
ment and so free to break it? Will we have to guard against 
each other all the time? Or can we truly go in peace with peace 


*94 



of mind? Would Corlcone give us all his assurances as I now 
give mine?’ 

It was then that Don Corlcone gave the speech that would 
be long remembered, and that reaffirmed his position as the 
most far-seeing statesman among them, so fuU of common 
sense, so direct from the heart; and to the heart of the matter. 
In it he coined a phrase that was to become as famous in its way 
as Churchill’s Iron Curtain, though not public knowledge 
until more than ten years later. 

For the first time he stood up to address the council. He was 
short and a little thin from his 'illness*, perhaps his sixty years 
showed a bit more but there was no question that he had 
regained all his former strength, and had all his wits. 

‘ What manner of men arc we then, if we do not have our 
reason,’ he said. ' We are aU no better than beasts in a jungle 
if that were the case. But we have reason, we can reason with 
each other and we can reason with ourselves. To what pur- 
pose would I start all these troubles again, the violence and the 
turmoil? My son is dead and that is a misfortune and 1 must 
bear it, not make the innocent world around me suffer with 
me. And so I say, I give my honour, that I will never seek 
vengeance, I will never seek knowledge of the deeds that have 
been done in the past. I will leave here with a pure heart. 

‘ Let me say that we must always look to our interests. We 
are all men who have refused to be fools, who have refused to 
be puppets dancing on a string pulled by the men on high. We 
have been fortunate here in this country. Already most of our 
children have found a better life. Some of you have sons who 
are professors, scientists, musicians, and you arc fortunate. 
Perhaps your grandchildren will become the n€V7*pe:(p^onovanti, 
None of us here want to sec our children follow in our foot- 
steps, it’s too hard a life. They can be as others, their position 
and security won by our courage. I have grandchildren now 
and I hope their children may someday, who knows, be a 
governor, a President, nothing’s impossible here in America. 
But we have to progress with the times. The time is past for 
guns and killings and massacres. We have to be cunning like 
the business people, there’s more money in it and it’s better for 
our children and our grandchildren. 


*95 



*As for our own deeds, we are not responsible for the .90 
calibres, the pev^p^wanti who take it upon themselves to 
decide what we shall do with our lives, who declare wars they 
wish us to fight in to protect what they own. Who is to say 
we should obey the laws they make for their own interest and 
to our hurt? And who are they then to meddle when we look 
after our own interests? Sonna cosa nostra^ Don Corleone said, 
‘these arc our own affairs. We will manage our world for our- 
selves because it is our world, cosa nostra. And so we have to 
stick together to guard against outside meddlers. Otherwise 
they will put the ring in our nose as they have put the ring in 
the nose of all the millions of Neapolitans and other Italians 
in the country. 

‘For this reason I forgo my vengeance for my dead son, for 
the common good. I swear now that as long as I am respon- 
sible for the actions of my Family there will not be one finger 
lifted against any man here without just cause and utmost 
prov<Kation. I am willing to sacrifice my commercial interests 
for the common good. This is my word, this is my honour, 
there arc those of you here who know I have never betrayed 
either. 

‘ But I have a selfish interest. My youngest son had to flee, 
accused of SoUozzo’s murder and that of a police captain. I 
must now make arrangements so that he can come home with 
safety, cleared of all those false charges. That is my afiair and 
1 will make those arrangements. I must find the real culprits 
perhaps, or perhaps I must convince the authorities of his 
innocence, perhaps the witnesses and informants will recant 
their lies. But again I say that this is my affair and I believe I 
will be able to bring my son home. 

‘But let me say this. I am a superstitious man, a ridiculous 
failing but I must confess it here. And so if some unlucky acci- 
dent should befall my youngest son, if some police ofRcer 
should accidentally shoot him, if he should hang himself in his 
cell, if new witnesses appear to testify to his guilt, my super- 
stition will make me feel that it was the result of the ill will still 
borne me by some people here. Let me go further. If my son 
is struck by a bolt of lightning I will blame some of the people 
here. If his plane should fall into the sea or his ship sink be- 

296 



neath the waves of the ocean, if he should catch a mortal fever, 
if his automobile should be struck by a train, such is my super- 
stition that I would blame the ill will felt by people here. 
Gendemen, that ill will, that bad luck, I could never forgive. 
But aside from that let me swear by the souls of my grand- 
children that 1 will never break the peace we have made, /ihct 
all, are we or arc we not better men than those pe!(j(pnopan/i 
who have killed coundess millions of men in our lifetimes?* 

With this Don Corlcone stepped from his place and went 
down the table to where Don Phillip Tattaglia was sitting. 
Tattaglia rose to greet him and the two men embraced, kissing 
each other’s cheeks. The other Dons in the room applauded 
and rose to shake hands with everybody in sight and to con- 
gratulate Don Corleone and Don Tattaglia on their new 
friendship. It was not perhaps the warmest friendship in the 
world, they would not send each other Christmas gift greetings, 
but they would not murder each other. That was friendship 
enough in this world, all that was needed. 

Since his son Freddie was under the protection of the 
Molinari Family in the West, Don Corleone lingered with the 
San Francisco Don after the meeting to thank him* Molinari 
said enough for Don Corleone to gather that Freddie had 
found his niche out there, was happy and had become some- 
thing of a ladies’ man. He had a genius for running a hotel, it 
seemed. Don Corleone shook his head in wonder, as many 
fathers do when told of undreamed-of talents in their children. 
Wasn’t it true that sometimes the greatest misfortunes brought 
unforeseen rewards? They both agreed that this was so. Mean- 
while Corleone made it clear to the San Francisco Don that he 
was in his debt for the great service done in protecting Freddie. 
He let it be known that his influence would be exerted so that 
the important racing wires would always be available to his 
people ho matter what changes occurred in the power struc- 
ture in the years to come, an important guarantee since the 
over this facility was a constant open wound com- 
plicated by the fact that the Chicago people had their heavy 
hand in it. But Don Corleone was not without influence even 
in that land of barbarians, and so his promise was a gift of gold. 

It was evening before Don Corleone, Tom Hagen, and the 


297 



bodyguard-chauffeur, who happened to be Rocco Lampone, 
arrived at the mall in Long Beach. When they went into the 
house the Don said to Hagen, ‘ Our driver, that man Lampone, 
keep an eye on him. He’s a fellow worth something better I 
think.’ Hagen wondered at this remark. Lampone had not said 
a word all day, had not even glanced at the two men in the 
back seat. He had opened the door for the Don, the car had 
been in front of the bank when they emerged, he had done 
everything correctly but no more than any well-trained chauf- 
feur might do. Evidently the Don’s eye had seen something he 
had not seen. 

The Don dismissed Hagen and told him to come back to the 
house after supper. But to take his time and rest a little since 
they would put in a long night of discussion. He also told 
Hagen to have Clemenza and Tessio present. They shobld 
come at lo pm, not before. Hagen was to brief Clemenza and 
Tessio on what had happened at the meeting that afternoon. 

At ten the Don was waiting for the three men in his office, 
the corner room of the house with its law library and special 
phone. There was a tray with whisky bottles, ice, and soda 
water. The Don gave his instructions. 

*We made the peace this afternoon,’ he said. ‘I gave my 
word and my honour and that should be enough for all of you. 
But our friends are not so trustworthy so let’s all be on our 
guard still. We don’t want any more nasty little surprises.’ 
The Don turned to Hagen, ‘You’ve let the Bocchicchio hos- 
tages go?’ 

Hagen nodded. ‘ I called Clememsa as soon as I got home.’ 

Corleone turned to the massive Clemenza. The caporegime 
nodded. ‘I released them. Tell me. Godfather, is it possible for 
a Sicilian to be as dumb as the Bocchicchios pretend to be?’ 

Don Corleone smiled a little. ‘They are clever enough to 
make a good living. Why is it so necessary to be more dever 
than that? It’s not the Bocchicchios who cause the troubles of 
this world. But it’s true, they haven’t got the Sicilian head.’ 

They were all in a relaxed mood, now that the war was over. 
Don Corleone himself mixed drinks and brought one to each 
man. The Don sipped his carefully and lit up a dgar. 

‘I Want nothing set forth to discover what happened to 

298 



Sonny, that*s done with and to be forgotten. I want all co- 
operation with the other Families even if they become a little 
greedy and we don't get our proper share in things. I want 
nothing to break this peace no matter what the provocation 
until weVc found a way to bring Michael home. And I want 
that to be first thing on your minds. Remember this, when he 
comes back he must come back in absolute safety. I don't mean 
from the Tattaglias or the Barsinis. What Fm concerned about 
are the police. Sure, we can get rid of the real evidence against 
him; that waiter won't testify, nor that spectator or gunman 
or whatever he was. I'hc real evidence is the least of our worries 
since we know about it. What wc have to worry about is the 
police framing false evidence because their informers have 
assured them that Michael Corleone is the man who killed their 
captain. Very well. We have to demand that the Five Families 
do everything in their power to correct this belief of the police. 
All their informers who work with the police must come up 
with new stories. I think after my speech this afternoon they 
will understand it is to their interest to do so. But that's not 
enough. We have to come up with something special so Michael 
won't ever have to worry about that again. Otherwise there's 
no point in him coming back to this country. So let's all think 
about that. That's the most important matter. 

*Now, any man should be allowed one foolishness in his 
life. I have had mine. 1 want all the land around die mall 
bought, the houses bought. I don't want any man able to look 
out his window into my garden even if it’s a mile away. I want 
a fence around the mall and I want the mall to be on full pro- 
tection all the time. I want a gate in that fence. In short, I wish 
now to live in a fortress. Let me say to you now that I will 
never go into the city to work again. I will be semi-retired. I 
feel an urge to work in the garden, to make a little wine when 
the grapes arc in season. I want to live in my house. The only 
time rU leave is to go on a litdc vacation or to sec someone on 
important business and then I want all precautions taken. Now 
don't take this amiss. I'm not preparing anything. I’m being 
prudent. I've always been a prudent man, there is nothing I 
find so litde to my taste as carelessness in life. Women and 
children can afford to be careless, men cannot. Be leisurely in 


299 



all these things, no fnntic ptepaiations to alarm our friends. 
It can be done in such a way as to seem natural. 

'Now I’m going to leave things more and more up to each 
of you three. I want the Santino regime disbanded and the men 
placed in your regimes. That should reassure our friends and 
show that I mean peace. Tom, I want you to put together a 
group of men who will go to Las Vegas and give me a full 
report on what is going on out there. Tell me about Fredo, 
what is really happening out there. I hear I wouldn’t recognize 
my own son. It seems he’s a cook now, that he amuses himself 
with young girls more than a grown man should. Well, he was 
always too serious when he was young and he was never the 
man for Family business. But let’s find out what really can be 
done out there.’ 

Hagen said quietly, ' Should we send your son-in-law? After 
all. Carlo is a native of Nevada, he knows his way around.’ 

Don Corleone shook his head. 'No, my wife is lonely here 
without any of her children. I want Constanzia and her hus- 
band moved into one of the houses on the mall. 1 want Carlo 
given a responsible job, maybe I’ve been too harsh on him, 
and ’ ~ Don Corleone made a grimace - ' I’m short of sons. Take 
him out of the gambling and put him in with the unions where 
he can do some paper work and a lot of talking. He’s a good 
talker.’ There was the tiniest note of contempt in the Don’s 
voice. 

Hagen nodded. *OK, Clemenza and I will go over all the 
people and put together a group to do the Vegas job. Do you 
want me to call Freddie home for a few days?’ 

The Don shook his head. He said cruelly, 'What for? My 
wife can still cook our meals. Let him stay out there.’ The 
three men shifted uneasily in their seats. They had not realized 
Freddie was in such severe disfavour with his father and they 
suspected it must be because of something they did not know. 

Don Corleone sighed. '1 hope to grow some good green 
peppers and tomatoes in the garden this year, more than we can 
eat. rU make you presents of them. I want a little peace, a littk 
quiet and tranquillity for my old age. Well, that’s all. Have 
another drink if you like.’ 

It was a dismissal. The men rose. Hagen accompanied 

joo 



Qemcnza and Tessio to dieir cars and arranged meetings with 
them to thrash out the operational details that would accom- 
plish the stated desires of their Don. Then he went back into 
the house where he knew Don Corleone would be waiting for 
him. 

The Don had taken off his jacket and tie and was lying down 
on the couch. His stern face was relaxed into lines of fatigue. 
He waved Hagen into a chair and said, 'Well, Consigliori^ do 
you disapprove of any of my deeds today?’ 

Hagen took his time answering. ‘No,’ he said. ‘But I don’t 
find it consistent, nor true to your nature. You say you don’t 
want to find out how Santino was killed or want vengeance 
for it. I don’t believe that. You gave your word for peace and 
so you’U keep the peace but I can’t believe you will give your 
enemies the victory they seem to have won today. You’ve con- 
structed a magnificent riddle that 1 can’t solve, so how can I 
approve or disapprove?’ 

A look of content came over the Don’s face. ‘Well, you 
know me better than anyone else. Even though you’re not a 
Sicilian, I made you one. Everything you say is true, but there’s 
a solution and you’ll comprehend it before it spins out to the 
end. You agree everyone has to take my word and I’ll keep my 
word. And I want my orders obeyed exactly. But, Tom, the 
most important thing is we have to get Michael home as soon 
as possible. Make that first in your mind and in your work. 
Explore all the legal alleys, I don’t care how much money you 
have to spend. It has to be foolproof when he comes home. 
Consult Ac best lawyers on criminal law. I’ll give you Ac 
names of some judges who will give you a private auAence. 
Until Aat time we have to guard against all treacheries.’ 

Hagen said, ‘Like you. I’m not worried so much about Ac 
real evidence as Ac evidence Aey will manufacture. Also some 
police friend may kill Michael after he’s arrested. They may 
kill him in his cell or have one of Ac prisoners do it. As I see 
it, we can’t even afford to have him arrested or accused.’ 

Don Corleone sighed. ‘1 know, I know. That’s Ae difficulty. 
But we can’t take too long. There arc troubles in Sicily. The 
young fellows over Acre don’t listen to their elders any more 
ftoda lot of the men deported fiDom America are just too mudi 



for the old-fashioned Dons to handle. Michael could get 
caught in between. I’ve taken some precautions against that 
and he’s still got a good cover but that cover won’t last for 
ever. That’s one of the reasons I had to make the peace. 
Barzini has friends in Sicily and they were beginning to sniff 
Michael’s trail. That gives you one of the answers to your 
riddle. I had to make the peace to insure my son’s safety. 
There was nothing ebe to do.’ 

Hagen didn’t bother asking the Don how he had got this 
information. He was not even surprised, and it was true that 
this solved part of the riddle. *When I meet with Tattaglia’s 
people to firm up the detaib, should I insist that all his drug 
middlemen be clean? The judges will be a little skittish about 
giving light sentences to a man with a record.’ 

Don Corleone shrugged. ‘They should be smart enough to 
figure that out themselves. Mention it, don’t insist. We’ll do 
our best but if they use a real snowbird and he gets caught, we 
won’t lift a finger. We’ll just tell them nothing can be done. But 
Barzini is a man who will know that without being told. You 
notice how he never committed himself in this affair. One 
might never have known he was in any way concerned. That 
is a man who doesn’t get caught on the losing side.’ 

Hagen was startled, ‘You mean he was behind SoUozzo and 
Tattaglia all the time?’ 

Don Corleone sighed, ‘Tattaglia is a pimp. He could never 
have outfought Santino. That’s why I don’t have to know 
about what happened. It’s enough to know that Barzini had a 
hand in it.’ 

Hagen let this sink in. The Don was giving him clues but 
there was something very important left put. Hagen knew what 
it was but he knew it was not his place to ask. He said good- 
night and turned to go. The Don had a last word for him. 

‘Remember, use all your wits for a pbn to bring Michael 
home,’ the Don said. ‘And one other thing. Arrange with the 
telephone man so that every month I get a list of all the tele- 
phone calb, made and received, by Qemenza and Tessio. 
I suspect them of nothing. I would swear they would never 
betray me. But there’s no harm in knowing any little thing 
that may help us before the event.’ 



Hagen nodded and went out. He wondered if the Don was 
keeping a check on him also in some way and then was ashamed 
of his suspicion. But now he was sure that in the subtle and 
complex mind of the Godfather a far-ranging plan of action 
was being initiated that made the day’s happenings no mote 
than a tactical retreat. And there was that one dark fact that no 
one mentioned, that he himself had not dared to ask, that Don 
Corleone ignored. All pointed to a day of reckoning in the 
future. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 

But it was to be nearly another year before Don Corleone 
could arrange for his son Michael co be smuggled back into the 
United States. During that time the whole Family racked their 
brains for suitable schemes. Even Carlo Rizzi was listened to 
now that he was living in the mall with Connie. (During that 
time they had a second child, a boy.) But none of the schemes 
met with the Don’s approval. 

Finally it was the Bocchicchio Family who through a mis- 
fortune of its own solved the problem. There was one Boc- 
chicchio, a young cousin of no more than twenty-five years of 
age, named Felix, who was born in America and with more 
brains than anyone in the clan had ever had before. He had 
refused to be drawn into the Family garbage hauling business 
and married a nice American girl of English stock to further 
his split from the clan. He went to school at night, to become a 
lawyer, and worked during the day as a civil service post office 
clerk. During that time he had three children but his wife was 
a prudent manager and they lived on his salary until he got his 
law degree. 

Now Felix Bocchicchio, like many young men, thought that 
having struggled to complete his education and master the 
tools of his profession, his virtue would automatically be re- 
warded and he would earn a decent living. This proved not to 
be the case. Still proud, he refused all help from his clan. But 



a lawyer friend of his, a young man well connected and with a 
budding career in a big law firm, talked Felix into doing him 
a little favour. It was very complicated, seemingly legal, and 
had to do with a bankruptcy fraud. It was a million-to-onc 
shot against its being found out. Felix Bocchicchio took the 
chance. Since the fraud involved using the legal skills he had 
learned in a university, it seemed not so reprehensible, and, in 
an odd way, not even criminal. 

To make a foolish story short, the fraud was discovered. 
The lawyer friend refused to help Felix in any manner, 're- 
fused to even answer his telephone calls. The two principals 
in the fraud, shrewd middle-aged businessmen who furiously 
blamed Felix Bocchicchlo’s legal clumsiness for the plan going 
awry, pleaded guilty and cooperated with the state, naming 
Felix Bocchicchio as the ringleader of the fraud and claiming 
he had used threats of violence to control their business and 
force them to cooperate with nim in his fraudulent schemes. 
Testimony was given that linked Felix with uncles and cousins 
in the Bocchicchio clan who had criminal records for strong- 
arm, and this evidence was damning. The two businessmen got 
off with suspended sentences. Felix Bocchicchio was given a 
sentence of one to five years smd served three of them. The 
clan did not ask help from any of the Families or Don Corleone 
because Felix had refused to ask their help and had to be 
taught a lesson: that mercy comes only from the Family, that 
the Family is more loyal and more to be trusted than society. 

In any case, Felix Bocchicchio was released from prison 
after serving three years, went home and kissed his wife and 
three children and lived peacefully for a year, and then showed 
that, he was of the Bocchicchio clan after all. Without any 
attempt to conceal his guilt, he procured a weapon, a pistol, 
and shot his lawyer friend to death. He then searched out the 
two businessmen and calmly shot them both through the head 
as they came out of a luncheonette. He left the bodies lying in 
the street and went into the luncheonette and ordered a cup of 
coffee which he drank while he waited for the police to come 
and arrest him. 

His trial was swiff: and his Judgement merciless. A member 
of the ortminal underworld had add-Uoadedly nrardered state 



wknetict who had tent him to the pcison he richly deserved. 
It was a flagrant flouting of society and for once the public, 
the press, the structure of society and even soft-headed and 
soft-hearted humanitarians were united in their desire to see 
Felix Bocchicchio in the electric chair. The governor of the 
state would no more grant him clemency than the officials of 
the pound spare a mad dog, which was the phrase of one of the 
governor’s closest political akles. The Bocchicchio clan of 
course would spend whatever money was needed for appeals to 
higher courts, ^ey were proud of him now, but the conclusion 
was certain. After the legal folderol, which might take a little 
time, Felix Bocchicchio would die in the electric chair. 

It was Hagen who brought this case to the attention of the 
Don at the request of one of the Bocchicchios who hoped that 
something could be done for the young man. Don Corleone 
curtly refused. He was not a magician. People asked him the 
impossible. But the next day the Don call^ Hagen into his 
ofHce and had him go over the case in the most intimate detail. 
When Hagen was finished, Don Corleone told him to summon 
the head of the Bocchicchio clan to the mall for a meeting. 

What happened next had the simplicity of genius. Don Cor- 
leone guaranteed to the head of the Bocchicchio clan that the 
wife and children of Felix Bocchicchio would be rewarded 
with a handsome pension. The money for this would be 
handed over to the Bocchicchio clan immediately. In turn, 
Felix must confess to the murder of Sollozzo and the police 
captain McQuskey. 

There were many details to be arranged. Felix Bocchicchio 
would have to confess convincingly, that is^ he would have to 
know some of the true details to confess to. Also, he must 
implicate the police captain in narcotics. Then the waiter at the 
Luna Restaurant must be persuaded to identify Felix Boc- 
chicchio as the murderer. This would take some courage, as 
the description would change radically, Felix Bocchicchio 
being much shorter and heavier. But Don G^rleone would 
attend to that. Also since the condemned man had been a 
great believer in higher education and a college graduate he 
would want his children to go to college. And so a sum of 
moti^ would have to be paid by Don Codeone that would 



take care of the children’s college. Then the Bocchicchio dan 
had to be reassured that there was no hope for demency on 
the original murders. The new confession of course would 
seal the man’s already almost certain doom. 

Everything was arranged, the money paid and suitable con- 
tact made with the condemned man so that he could be in- 
structed and advised. Finally the plan was sprung and the 
confession made headlines inwall the newspapers. The whole 
thing was a huge success. But Don Corleonc, cautious as 
always, waited until Felix Bocchicchio was actually executed 
four months later before finally giving the command that 
Michael Corleone could return home. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 

Lucy Mancini, a year after Sonny’s death, still missed him 
terribly, grieved for him more fiercely than any lover in any 
romance. And her dreams were not the insipid dreams of a 
schoolgirl, her longings not the longings of a devoted wife. 
She was not rendered desolate by the loss of her ‘life’s com- 
panion *, or miss him because of his stalwart character. She 
held no fond remembrances of sentimental gifts, of girlish hero 
worship, his smile, the amused glint of his eyes when he said 
something endearing or witty. 

No. She missed him for the more important reason that he 
had been the only man in the world who could make her body 
achieve the act of love. And, in her youth and innocence, she 
still believed that he was the only man who could possibly do 
so. 

Now a year later she sunned herself in the balmy Nevada air. 
At her feet the slender, blond young man was playing with 
her toes. They were at the side of the hotel pool for the Sunday 
afternoon and despite the people all around them his hand was 
sliding up her bare thigh. 

‘Oh, Jules, stop,* Lucy said. ‘I thought doctors at least 
weren’t as silly as other men.* 

306 



Jules grinned at her. *rm a Las Vegas doctor.’ He tickled 
the inside of her thigh and was amazed how just a little thing 
like that could excite her so powerfully. It showed on her hcc 
though she tried to bide it. She was really a very primitive, 
innocent girl. Then why couldn’t he make her come across? 
He had to figure that one out and never mind the crap about 
a lost love that could never be replaced. This was living tissue 
here under his hand and living tissue required other living 
tissue. Dr Jules Segal decided he would make the big push 
tonight at his apartment. He’d wanted to make her come 
across without any trickery but if trickery there had to be, he 
was the man for it. All in the interests of science of course. 
And, besides, this poor kid was dying for it. 

‘Jules, stop, please stop,’ Lucy said. Her voice was trem- 
bling. 

Jidcs was immediately contrite. ‘OK, honey,’ he said. He 
put his head in her lap and using her soft thighs as a pillow, 
he took a little nap. He was amused at her squirming, the heat 
that registered from her loins and when she put her hand on 
his head to smooth his hair, he grasped her wrist playfully and 
held it loverlike but really to feel her pulse. It was galloping. 
He’d get her tonight and he’d solve the mystery, what the hell 
evei it was. Fully confident. Dr Jules Segal fell asleep. 

Lucy watched the people around the pool. She could never 
have imagined her life would change so in less than two years. 
She never regretted her ‘foolishness’ at Connie Corleone’s 
wedding. It was the most wonderful thing that had ever hap- 
pened to her and she lived it over and over again in her 
dreams. As she lived over and over again the months that 
followed. 

Sonny had visited her once a week, sometimes more, never 
less. The days before she saw him again her body was in tor- 
ment. Their passion for each other was of the most elementary 
kind, undiluted by poetry or any form of intellectualism. It was 
love of the coarsest nature, a fieshy love, a love of tissue for 
opposing tissue. 

When Sonny called to tell her he was coming she made 
certain there was enough liquor in the apartment and enough 
food for supper and breakfast because usually he would not 

307 



leave untU late the next morning. He wanted his fill of her as 
she wanted her fill of him. He had his own key and when he 
came in the door she would fiy into his massive arms. They 
would both be brutally direct, brutally primitive. During their 
first kiss they would be fumbling at each other’s clothing and 
he would be lifting her in the air, and she would be wrapping 
her legs around his huge thighs. They would be making love 
standing up in the foyer of her apartment as if they had to 
repeat their first act of love together, and then he would carry 
her so to the bedroom. 

They would lie in bed making love. They would live to- 
gether in the apartment for sixteen hours, completely naked. 
She would cook for him, enormous meals. Sometimes he would 
get phone calls obviously about business but she never even 
listened to the words. She would be too busy toying with his 
body, fondling it, kissing it, burying her mouth in it. Some- 
times when he got up to get a drink and he walked by her, she 
couldn’t help reaching out to touch his naked body, hold him, 
make love to him as if those special parts of his body were a 
plaything, a specially constructed, intricate but innocent toy 
revealing its known, but still surprising, ecstasies. At first she 
had been ashamed of these excesses on her part but soon saw 
that they pleased her lover, that her complete sensual en- 
slavement to his body flattered him. In all this there was an 
animal iimoccnce. They were happy together. 

When Sonny’s father was gunned dowm in the street, she 
understood for the first time that her lover might be in danger. 
Alone in her apartment, she did not weep, she wailed aloud, 
an animal wailing. When Sonny did not come to see her for 
almost three weeks she subsisted on sleeping pills, liquor, and 
her oVn anguish. The pain she felt was physical pain, her body 
ached. When he finally did come she held on to his body at 
almost every moment. After that he came at least once a week 
until he was killed. 

She learned of his death through the newspaper accounts 
and that very same night she took a massive overdose of 
sleeping pills. For some reason, instead of killing, the pills 
mai^ her so ill that she staggered out into the 1^ of her 
apartment and coPapsed in inmt of the devator door where 



she was found and taken to the hospital. Her relationship to 
Sonny was not generally known so her case received only a 
few inches in the tabloid newspapers. 

It was while she was in the hospital that Tom Hagen came 
to see her and console her. It was Tom Hagen who arranged a 
job for her in Las Vegas working in the hotel run by Sonny’s 
brother Freddie. It was Tom Hagen who told her that she 
would receive an annuity from the Corlcone Family, that 
Sonny had made provisions for her. He had asked her if she 
was pregnant, as if that were the reason for her taking the 
pills and she had told him no. He asked her if Sonny had come 
to see her that fatal night or had called that he would come 
to see her and she told him no, that Sonny had not called. 
That she was always home waiting for him when she finished 
working. And she had told Hagen the truth. *He’s the only 
man I could ever love,* she said. *l can’t love anybody else.’ 
She saw him smile a little but he also looked surprised. ‘Do 
you find that so unbelievable?’ she asked. ‘Wasn’t he the one 
who brought you home when you were a kid?’ 

‘ He was a didcrent person,’ Hagen said, ‘ be grew up to be a 
different kind of man.’ 

‘ Not to me,’ Lucy said. ‘ Maybe to everybody else, but not to 
me.' She was still too weak to explain bow Sonny had never 
been anything but gentle with her. He’d never been angry with 
her, never even irritable or nervous. 

Hagen made all the arrangements for her to move to Las 
Vegas. A rented apartment was waiting, he took her to the air- 
port himself and be made her promise that if she ever felt 
lonely or if things didn’t go right, she would call him and he 
would help her in any way he could. 

Before she got on the plane she asked him hesitantly, ‘Docs 
Sonny’s father know what you’re doing?’ 

Hagen smiled, ‘I’m acting for him as well as myself. He’s 
old-fashioned in these things and he would never go against 
the legal wife of his son. But he feels that you were just a 
young girl and Sonny should have known better. And your 
taking those pills shook everybody up.’ He didn’t explain 
how incredible it was to a man like the Don that any person 
should try suicide. 



Now, after nearly eighteen months in Las Vegas, she was 
surprised to find herself almost happy. Some nights she 
dreamed about Sonny and lying awake before dawn continued 
her dream with her own caresses until she could sleep again. 
She had not had a man since. But the life in Vegas agreed with 
her. She went swimming in the hotel pools, sailed on Lake 
Mead, and drove through the desert on her day off. She be- 
came thinner and this improved her figure. She was still 
voluptuous but more in the American than the old Italian 
style. She w^^tked in the public relations section of the hotel 
as a receptionist and had nothing to do with Freddie though 
when he saw her he would stop and chat a little. She was sur- 
prised at the change in Freddie. He had become a ladies’ man, 
dressed beautifully, and seemed to have a real ffair for running 
a gambling resort. He controlled the hotel side, something 
not usually done by casino owners. With the long, very hot 
summer seasons, or perhaps his more active sex life, he too 
had become thinner and Hollywood tailoring made him look 
almost debonair in a deadly sort of way. 

It was after six months that Tom Hagen came out to see how 
she was doing. She had been receiving a cheque for six hundred 
dollars a month, every month, in addition to her salary. Hagen 
explained that this money had to be shown as coming from 
some place and asked her to sign complete powers of attorney 
so that he could channel the money properly. He also told her 
that as a matter of form she would be listed as owner of five 
'points’ in the hotel in which she worked. She would have to 
go through all the legal formalities required by the Nevada' 
laws but everything would be taken care of for her and her 
own personal inconvenience would be at a minimum. How- 
ever she was not to discuss this arrangement with anyone 
without his consent. She would be protected legally in every 
way and her money every month would be assured. If the 
authorities or any law-enforcement agencies ever questioned 
her, she was to simply refer them to her lawyer and she would 
not be bothered any further. 

Lucy agreed. She understood what was happening but had 
no objections to how she was being used. It seemed a reason- 
able favour. But when Hagen asked her to keep her eyes open 


510 



around the hotel, keep an eye on Freddie and on Freddie’s 
boss, the man who owned and operated the hotel, as a major 
stockholder, she said to him, ‘Oh, Tom, you don’t want me 
to spy on FreddieV 

Hagen smiled. ‘His father worries about Freddie. He’s in 
fast company with Moe Greene and we just want to make sure 
he doesn’t get into any trouble.’ He didn’t bother to explain 
to her that the Don had backed the building of this hotel in 
the desert of Las Vegas not only to supply a haven for his son, 
but to get a foot in the door for bigger operations. 

It was shortly after this interview that Dr Jules Segal came 
to work as the hotel house physician. He was very thin, very 
handsome and charming and seemed very young to be a 
doctor, at least to Lucy, She met him when a lump grew above 
her wrist on her forearm. She worried about it for a few days, 
then one morning went to the doctor’s suite of offices in the 
hotel. Two of the show girls from the chorus line were in the 
waiting room, gossiping with each other. They had the blonde 
peach-coloured prettiness Lucy always envied. They looked 
angelic. But one of the girls was saying, ‘I swear if I have 
another dose I’m giving up dancing.’ 

When Dr Jules Segal opened his office door to motion one 
of the show girls inside, Lucy was tempted to leave, and if it 
had been something more personal and serious she would 
have. Dr Segal was wearing slacks and an open shirt. The 
horn-rimmed glasses helped and his quiet reserved manner, 
but the impression he gave was an informal one, and like 
many basically old-fashioned people, Lucy didn’t believe that 
medicine and informality mixed. 

When she finally got into his office there was something so 
reassuring in his manner that all her misgivings fled. He spoke 
hardly at all and yet he was not brusque, and he took his time. 
When she asked him what the lump was he patiently explained 
that it was a quite common fibrous growth that could in no 
way be malignant or a cause for serious concern. He picked 
up a heavy medical book and said, ‘Hold out your arm.’ 

She held out her arm tentatively. He smiled at her for the 
first time. ‘I’m going to cheat myself out of a surgical fee,* he 
said. ‘I’ll just smash it with this book and it will flatten out. It 


3 ” 



may pop up*again but if I remove it surgically, you’ll be out of 
money and have to wear bandages and all that. OK?’ 

She smiled at him. For some reason she had an absolute 
trust in him. ‘OK,’ she said. In the next instant she let out a 
yell as be brought down the heavy medical volume on her 
forearm. The lump had flattened out, almost. 

‘Did it hurt that much?’ he asked. 

‘No,’ she said. She watched him completing her case history 
catd. ‘Is that all?’ 

He nodded, not paying any more attention to hex. She left. 

A week later he saw her in the coffee shop and sat next to her 
at the counter. ‘How’s the arm?’ he asked. 

She smiled at him. ‘Fine,* she said. ‘You’re pretty unortho- 
dox but you’re pretty good.’ 

He grinned at her. ‘You don’t know how unorthodox I am. 
And I didn’t know how rich you were. The Vegas Sm just 
published the list of point owners in the hotel and Lucy 
Mancini has a big ten points. I could have made a fortune on 
that little bump.’ 

She didn’t answer him, suddenly reminded of Hagen’s 
warnings. He grinned again. ‘Don’t worry, I know the score, 
you’re just one of the dummies, Vegas is full of them. How 
about seeing one of the shows with me tonight and I’ll even 
buy you some roulette chips.’ 

She was a little doubtful. He urged her. Finally she said, ‘I’d 
like to come but I’m afraid you might be disappointed by how 
the night ends. I’m not really a swinger like most of the girls 
here in Vegas.’ 

‘That’s why I asked you,’ Jules said cheerfully. ‘I’ve pre- 
scribed a night’s rest for myself.’ 

Lucy smiled at him and said a little sadly, ‘ Is it that obvious? ’ 
He shook his head and she said, *OK, supper then, but I’ll 
buy my own roulette chips.* 

They went to the supper show and Jules kept her amused by 
describing different types of bare thighs and breasts in medical 
terms ; but without sneering, all in good humour. Afterwards 
they played roulette together at the same wheel and won over 
a hundred dollars. Still later they drove up to Boulder Dam in 
the moonlight and he tried to make love to her but when she 



resisted after a few kisses he knew she really meant no and 
stopped. Again he took his defeat with great good humour. 
‘1 told you 1 wouldn’t,’ Luq^ said with half-guilty reproach. 

‘You would have been aw^Uy insulted if I didn’t even try,* 
Jules said. And she had to laugh because it was true. 

The next few months they became best friends. It wasn’t love 
because they didn’t make love, Lucy wouldn’t let him. She 
could see he was puzzled by her refusal but not hurt the way 
most men would be and that made her trust him even more. 
She found out that beneath his professional doctor’s exterior 
he was wildly fiin-loving and reckless. On weekends he drove 
a souped-up MG in the California races. When he took a 
vacation he went down into the interior of Mexico, the real 
wild coimtry, he told her, where strangers were murdered 
for their shoes and life was as primitive as a thousand years 
ago. Quite accidentally she learned that he was a surgeon and 
had been connected with a famous hospital in New York. 

All this made her more puzzled than ever at his having taken 
the job at the hotel. When she asked him about it, Jules said, 
‘You tell me your dark secret and I’ll tell you mine.’ 

She blushed and let the matter drop. Jules didn’t pursue it 
either and their relationship continued, a warm friendship that 
she counted on more than she realized. 

Now, sitting at the side of the pool with Jules’ blond head in 
her lap, she felt an overwhelming tenderness for him. Her 
loins ached and without realizing it her fingers sensuously 
stroked the skin of his neck. He seemed to be sleeping, not 
noticing, and she became excited just by the feel of him against 
her. Suddenly he raised his head from her lap and stood up. 
He took her by the hand and led her over the grass on to the 
cement walk. She followed him dutifully even when he led her 
into one of the cottages that held his private apartment. When 
they were inside he fixed them both big drinks. After the 
blazing sun and her own sensuous thoughts the drink went to 
her head and made her dizzy. Then Jules had his arms around 
her and their bodies, naked except for scanty bathing suite, 
were pressed against each other. Lucy was murmuring, ‘ Don’t,’ 
but there was no conviction in her voice and Jules paid no 



attention to her. He quickly stripped her bathing bra off so 
that he could fondle her heavy breasts, kissed them and then 
stripped off her bathing trunks and as he did so kept kissing 
her body, her rounded belly and the insides of her thighs. He 
stood up, struggling out of his own bathing shorts and em- 
bracing her, and then, naked in each other’s arms, they were 
lying on his bed and she could feel him entering her and it was 
enough, just the slight touch, for her to reach her climax and 
then in the second afterwards she could read in the motions of 
his body, his surprise. She felt the overwhelming shame she 
had felt before she knew Sonny, but Jules was twisting her 
body over the edge of the bed, positioning her legs a certain 
way and she let him control her limbs and her body, and then 
he was entering her again and kissing her and this time she 
could feci him but more important she could tell that he was 
feeling something too and coming to his climax. 

When he rolled off her body, Lucy huddled into one corner 
of the bed and began to cry. She felt so ashamed. And then 
she was shockingly surprised to hear Jules laugh softly and 
say, ‘You poor benighted Eyc-talian girl, so that’s why you 
kept refusing me all these months? You dope.’ He said ‘you 
dope ’ with such friendly affection that she turned towards him 
and he took her naked body against his saying, ‘You are 
medieval, you are positively medieval.’ But the voice was 
soothingly comforting as she continued to weep. 

Jules lit a cigarette and put it in her mouth so that she 
choked on the smoke and had to stop crying. ‘Now listen to 
me,’ he said, ‘if you had had a decent modern raising with a 
family culture that was part of the twentieth century your 
problem would have been solved years ago. Now let me tell 
you what your problem is ; it’s not the equivalent of being ugly, 
of having bad skin and squinty eyes that facial surgery really 
doesn’t solve. Your problem is like having a wart or a mole 
on your chin, or an improperly formed car. Stop thinking of 
it in sexual terms. Stop thinking in your head that you have a 
big box no man can love because it won’t give his penis the 
necessary friction. What you have is a pelvic malformation and 
what we surgeons call a weakening of the pelvic floor. It 
usually comes after child-bearing but it can be simply bad bone 



structure. It’s a common condition and many women live a 
life of misery because of it when a simple operation could fix 
them up. Some women even commit suicide because of it. But 
I never figured you for that condition because you have such a 
beautiful body. I thought it was psychological, since I know 
your story, you told it to me often enough, you and Sonny. 
But let me give you a thorough physical examination and I 
can tell you just exactly how much work will have to be done. 
Now go in and take a shower.’ 

Lucy went in and took her shower. Patiently and over her 
protests, Jules made her lie on the bed, legs spread apart. He 
had an extra doctor’s bag in his apartment and it was open. He 
also had a small glass-topped table by the bed which held some 
other instruments. He was all business now, examining her, 
sticking his fingers inside her and moving them around. She 
was beginning to feel humiliated when he kissed her on the 
navel and said, almost absentmindedly, ‘First time I’ve en- 
joyed my work.’ Then he flipped her over and thrust a finger 
in her rectum, feeling around, but his other hand was stroking 
her neck affectionately. When he was finished he turned her 
right side up again, kissed her tenderly on the mouth and said, 
‘Baby, I’m going to build you a whole new thing down there, 
and then I’ll try it out personally. It will be a medical first. I’ll 
be able to write a paper on it for the official journals.’ 

Jules did everything with such good-humoured affection, he 
so obviously cared for her, that Lucy got over her shame and 
embarrassment. He even had the medical textbook down off 
its shelf to show her a case like her own and the surgical pro- 
cedure to correct it. She found herself quite interested. 

‘It’s a health thing too,’ Jules said. ‘If you don’t get it 
corrected you’re going to have a hell of a lot of trouble later 
on with your whole plumbing system. The structure becomes 
progressively weaker unless it’s corrected by surgery. It’s a 
damn shame that old-fashioned prudery keeps a lot of doc- 
tors from properly diagnosing and correcting the situation, 
and a lot of women from complaining about it.’ 

‘Don’t talk about it, please don’t talk about it,’ Lucy said. 

He could see that she was still to some extent ashamed of 
her secret, embarrassed by her ‘ugly defect’. Though to his 



medically trained mind this seemed the height of silliness, he 
was sensitive enough to identify with her. It also put him on 
the right track to making her feel better. 

* OK, I know your secret so now I’ll tell you mine,’ he said. 

‘ You always ask me what I’m doing here in this town, one of 
the youngest and most brilliant surgeons in the East.’ He was 
mocking some newspaper reports about himself. *The truth 
is that I’m an abortionist, which in itself is not so bad, so is 
half the medical profession; but 1 got caught. I had a friend, 
a doctor named Kennedy, we interned together, and he’s a 
really straight guy but he said he’d help me. I understand Tom 
Hagen had told him if he ever needed help on anything the 
Corleone Family was indebted to him. So he spoke to Hagen. 
The nact thing I know the charges were dropped, but the 
Medical Association and the Eastern establishment had me 
blacklisted. So the Corleone Family got me this job out here. 
I make a good living. I do a job ^at has to be done. These 
show girls are always getting knocked up and aborting them 
is the easiest thing in the world if they come to me right away. 
1 curette ’em like you scrape a frying pan. Freddie Corleone is 
a real terror. By my count he’s knocked up fifteen girls while 
I’ve been here. I’ve seriously considered giving him a fathet- 
to-fsther talk about sex. Especially since I’ve had to treat him 
three times for clap and once for syphilis. Freddie is the original 
bareback rider.’ 

Jules stopped talking. He had been deliberately indiscreet, 
something he never did, so that Lucy would know that other 
people, including someone she knew and feared a little like 
Freddie Corleone, also had shameful secrets. 

* Think of it as a piece of elastic in your body that has lost 
its. elasticity,’ Jules said. *By cutting out a piece, you make it 
tighter, snappier.’ 

‘I’ll think about it,’ Lucy said, but she was sure she was 
going to go through with it, she trusted Jules absolutely. Then 
she thought of something else. ‘How much will it cost?’ 

Jules frowned. *I haven’t the facilities here for surgery like 
that and I’m not the expert at it. But I have a friend in Los 
Angeles who’s the best in the field and has facilities at the best 
hospital. In fact he tightens up all the movie stars, when those 

5t6 



dames fifid out that getting thek faces and breasts lifted isn’t 
the whole answer to making a man love them. He owes me a 
few favours so it won’t cost anything. 1 do his abortions for 
him. Listen, if it weren’t unethical I’d tell you the names of 
some of the movie sex queens who have had the operation.’ 

She was immediately curious. * Oh, come on, tell me,’ she 
said. ‘Come on.’ It would be a delicious piece of gossip and 
one of the things about Jules was that she could show her 
feminine love of gossip without him making fun of it. 

‘ I’ll tell you if you have dinner with me and spend the night 
with me,* Jules said. ‘We have a lot of lost time to make up 
for because of ydur silliness.’ 

Lucy felt an overwhelming affection to him for being so 
kind and she was able to say, ‘You don’t have to sleep with 
me, you know you won’t enjoy it the way 1 am now.* 

Jules burst out laughing. ‘You dope, you incredible dope. 
Didn’t you ever hear of any other way of making love, far 
more ancient, far mote civilized. Are you really that innocent ? * 

*Oh that,’ she said. 

‘Oh that,’ he mimicked her. ‘Nice girls don’t do that, manly 
men don’t do that. Even in the year 1948. Well, baby, 1 can 
take you to the house of a little old lady right here in Las Vegas 
who was the youngest madam of the most popular whorehouse 
in the wild west days, back in 1880 , 1 think it was. She likes to 
talk about the old days. You know what she told me? That 
those gunslingers, those manly, virile, straight-shoodng cow- 
boys would always ask the girls for a “French”, what we 
doctors call fellatio, what you call “oh that”. Did you ever 
think of doing “oh that” with yoUr beloved Sonny?’ 

For the first time she truly surprised him. She turned on him 
with what he could think of only as a Mona Lisa smile (his 
scientific mind immediately darting off on a tangent, could this 
be the solving of that centuries-old mystery?) and said quietly, 
‘I did everything with Sonny.’ It was the first time she had 
ever admitted anything like that to anyone. 

Two weeks later Jules Segal stood in the operating room of 
the Los Angeles hospital and watched his friend Dr Frederick 
Kelloer perform the q^edalty. Before Lacy was put under 
anarstheria, J ulfs le a n ed over and wh ii prred, ‘I told him you 


3n 



were my special girl so he*s going to pat in some real tight 
walls.’ But the preliminary pill had already made her dopey 
and she didn’t laugh or smile. His teasing remark did take 
away some of the terror of the operation. 

Dr Kellner made his indsion with the confidence of a pool 
shark making an easy shot. The technique of any operation 
to strengthen the pelvic fioor required the accomplishment of 
two objectives. The musculofibrous pelvis sling had to be 
shortened so that the slack was taken up. And of course the 
vaginal opening, the weak spot itself in the pdvic floor, had 
to be brought forward, brought under the pubic arch and so 
relieved from the line of direct pressure above. Repairing the 
pelvic sling was called perineorrhaphy. Suturing the vaginal 
wall was called colporrhaphy. 

Jules saw that Dr Kellner was working carefiiUy now, the 
big danger in the cutting was going too deep and hitting the 
rectum. It was a fairly uncomplicated case, Jules had studied 
all the X-rays and tests. Nothing should go wrong except that 
in surgery something could always go wrong. 

Kellner was working on the diaphragm sling, the T forceps 
hdd the vaginal flap, and exposing the ani musde and the 
fasd which formed its sheath. Kellner’s gauze-covered fingers 
were pushing aside loose connective tissue. Jules kept his eyes 
on the vaginal wall for the appearance of the veins, the telltale 
danger signal of injuring the rectum. But old Kdlner knew his 
stuff. He was building a new snatch as easily as a carpenter 
nails together two-by-four studs. 

Kellner was trimming away the excess vaginal wall using the 
fastening-down stitch to close the ‘bite’ taken out of the tissue 
of the redundant angle, insuring that no troublesome projec- 
tiohs would form. Kellner was trying to insert three fingers 
into the narrowed opening of the lumen, then two. He just 
managed to get two fingers in, probing deeply and for a 
moment he looked up at Jules and his china-blue eyes over 
the gauze mask twinkled as though asking if that was narrow 
enough. Then he. was busy again with his sutures. 

It was all over. They wheeled Lucy out to the recovery room 
and Jules talked to Kellner. Kellner was cheerful, the best sign 
that everything had gone well. ‘No complications at all, my 

518 



boy,* he told Jules. ‘Nothing growing in there, very simple 
case. She has wonderful body tone, unusual in these cases and 
now she’s in first-class shape for fun and games. I envy you, 
my boy. Of course you’ll have to wait a little while but then 1 
guarantee you’ll like my work.’ 

Jules laughed. ‘You’re a true Pygmalion, Doctor. Really, 
you were marvellous.’ 

Dr Kellner grunted. ‘That’s all child’s play, like your abor- 
tions. If society would only be realistic, people like you and I, 
really talented people, could do important work and leave this 
stuff for the hacks. By the way. I’ll be sending you a girl next 
week, a very nice girl, they seem to be the ones who always 
get in trouble. That will make us all square for this job today.* 

Jules shook his hand. ‘ Thanks, Doctor. Come out yourself 
sometime and I’ll see that you get all the courtesies of the 
house.’ 

Kellner gave him a wry smile. ‘ I gamble every day, I don’t 
need your roulette wheels and crap tables. I knock heads with 
fate too often as it is. You’re going to waste out there, Jules. 
Another couple of years and you can forget about serious 
surgery. You won’t be up to it.’ He turned away. 

Jules knew it was not meant as a reproach but as a warning. 
Y et it took the heart out of him anyway. Since Lucy wouldn’t be 
out of the recovery room for at least twelve hours, he went out 
on the town and got drunk. Part of the getting drunk was his feel- 
ing of relief that everything had worked out so well with Lucy. 

The next morning when he went to the hospital to visit her 
he was surprised to find two men at her bedside and flowers 
aU over the room. Lucy was propped up on pillows, her face 
radiant. Jules was surprised because Lucy had broken with her 
family and had told him not to notify them unless something 
went wrong. Of course Freddie Corleone knew she was in the 
hospital for a minor operation; that had been necessary so that 
they both could get time off, and Freddie had told Jules that 
the hotel would pick up all the bills for Lucy. 

Lucy was introducing them and one of the men Jules recog- 
niaed instantly. The famous Johnny Fontane. The other was a 
big, muscular, snotty-looking Italian guy whose name was 


519 



Nino Valenti. They both shook hands with Jules and then 
paid no further attention to him. They were kidding Lucy, 
talking about the old neighbourhood in New York, about 
people and events Jules had no way of sharing. So he said to 
Lucy, *1*11 drop by later, I have to see Dr Kellner anyway/ 

But Johnny Fontane was turning the charm on him. ‘Hey, 
buddy, we have to leave ourselves, you keep Lucy company. 
Take good care of her. Doc/ Jules noticed a peculiar hoarse- 
ness in Johnny Fontane’s voice and remembered suddenly 
that the man hadn*t sung in public for over a year now, that 
he had won the Academy Award for his acting. Could the 
man’s voice have changed so late in life and the papers keeping 
it a secret, everybody keeping it a secret? Jules loved inside 
gossip and he kept listening to Fontane’s voice in an attempt to 
diagnose the trouble. It could be simple strain, or too much 
booze and cigarettes or even too much women. The voice had 
an ugly timbre to it, he could never be called the sweet crooner 
any more. 

*You sound like you have a cold,’ Jules said to Johnny 
Fontane. 

Fontane said politely, *Ju8t strain, I tried to sing last night. 
1 gviess 1 just can’t accept the fact that my voice changed, get- 
ting old you know.’ He gave Jules a what-the-hell grin. 

Jules said casually, * Didn’t you get a doctor to look at it? 
Maybe it’s something that can be fixed.’ 

Fontane was not so charming now. He gave Jules a long 
cool look, * That’s the first thing I did nearly two years ago. 
Best specialists. My own doctor who’s supposed to be the top 
guy out here in California. They told me to get a lot of rest. 
Nothing wrong, just getting older. A man’s voice changes 
when he gets older.’ 

Fontane ignored him after that, paying attention to Lucy, 
charming her as he charmed all women. Jules kept listening 
to the voice. There had to be a growth on those vocal 
chords. But then why the hell hadn’t the specialists spotted 
it? Was it malignant and inoperable? Then there was other 
stuff. 

He interrupted Fontane to ask, * When was the last time you 
got examined by a specialist?’ 


320 



Fontane was obviously irritated but trying to be polite for 
Lucy’s sake. ‘About eighteen months ago/ he said. 

‘Does your own doctor take a look once in a while?’ Jules 
asked. 

‘Sure he does/ Johnny Fontane said irritably. ‘He gives me 
a codeine spray and checks me out. He told me it’s just my 
voice ageing, that all the drinking and smoking and other 
stuff. Maybe you know more than he does?’ 

Jules asked, ‘What’s his name?’ 

Fontane said with just a faint flicker of pride, ‘Tucker, Dr 
James Tucker. Wliat do you think of him?’ 

The name was familiar, linked to famous movie stars, 
female, and to an expensive health farm. 

‘He’s a sharp dresser,’ Jules said with a grin. 

Fontane was angry now. ‘You think you’re a better doctor 
than he is?’ 

Jules laughed. ‘Are you a better singer than Carmen Lom- 
bardo?’ He was surprised to see Nino Valenti break up in 
laughter, banging his head on his chair. The joke hadn’t been 
that good. Then on the wings of those guffaws he caught 
the smeU of bourbon and knew that even this early in the 
morning Mr Valenti, whoever the hell he was, was at least 
half drunk. 

Fontane was grinning at his friend. ‘Hey, you’re supposed 
to be laughing at my jokes, no^ his.’ Meanwhile Lucy stretched 
out her hand to Jules and drew him to her bedside. 

‘He looks like a bum but he’s a brilliant surgeon,’ Lucy told 
them. ‘If he says he’s better than Dr Tucker then he’s better 
than Dr Tucker. You listen to him, Johnny.’ 

The nurse came in and told them they would have to leave. 
The resident was going to do some work on Lucy and needed 
privacy. Jules was amused to see Lucy turn her head away so 
when Johnny Fontane and Nino Valenti kissed her they w’ould 
hit her cheek instead of her mouth, but they seemed to expect 
it. She let Jules kiss her on the mouth and whispered, ‘Come 
back this afternoon, please?* He nodded. 

Out in the corridor, Valenti asked him, ‘ WTiat was the opera- 
tion for? Anything serious?* 

Jules shook his head. ‘Just a little female plumbing. 

5^1 


God&ther n 



Alisolutelv routine, please belie\ c me. I’m more concerned than 
voii arc, I hope to marry the girl/ 

They were looking at him appraisingly so he asked, *How 
did you find out she was in the hospital?’ 

* TTeddie called us and asked us to look in,’ Fontane said. 
‘Wc all grew up in the same neighbourhood. Lucy was maid 
ot' honour when Freddie’s sLstcr got married.’ 

X)li,’ Jules said. Fie didn’t let on that he knew the -whole 
story, perhaps because they were so cagey about protecting 
Lucy and her afFair with Sonny. 

As they walked down the corridor, Jules said to Fontane, ‘I 
have visiting doctor’s privileges here, why don’t you let me 
have a look at your throat?’ 

Fontane shook his head. ‘I’m in a hurry.’ 

Nino Valenti said, ‘That’s a million-dollar throat, he can’t 
have cheap doctors looking down it.’ Jules saw Valenti was 
grinning at him, obviously on his side. 

Jules said cheerfully, ‘I’m no cheap doctor. I w'as the 
brightest young surgeon and diagnostician on the East Coast 
until they got me on an abortion rap.’ 

As he had known it would, that made them take him 
seriously. By admitting his crime he inspired belief in his claim 
of high competence. Valenti recovered first. ‘If Johnny can’t 
use you, I got a girlfriend I want you to look at, not at her 
throat though.’ 

I'ontane said to him nervously, ‘How long will you take?’ 

‘Ten minutes,’ Jules said. It was a lie but he believed in 
telling lies to people. Truth telling and medicine just didn’t go 
together except in dire emergencies, if then. 

‘OK,* Fontane said. His voice was darker, hoarser, with 
fright. 

Jules recruited a nurse and a consulting room. It didn’t have 
everything he needed but there was enough. In less than ten 
minutes he knew there was a growth on the vocal chords, that 
was easy. Tucker, that incompetent sartorial son of a bitch of a 
Hollywood phony, should have been able to spot it. Christ, 
maybe the guy didn’t even have a licence and if he did it 
should be taken away from him. Jules didn’t pay any attention 
to the two men now. He picked up the phone and asked for 


522 



the throat man at the hospital to come down. Then he swung 
around and said to Nino Valenti, * 1 think it might be a long 
wait for you, you'd better leave.' 

Fontane stared at him in uttet disbelief. ‘ You son of a bitchy 
you think you're going to keep me here? You think you’re 
going to fuck around with my throat ? ’ 

Jules, with more pleasure than he w^ould have thought pos- 
sible, gave it to him straight Between the eyes. ‘You can do 
whatever you like,' he said. ‘ You’ve got a growth of some sort 
on your vocal chords, in youi larynx. If you stay here the next 
few hours, wc can nail it down, whether it’s malignant non- 
malignant. We can make a decision for surgery or treatment. 
I can give you the whole story. I can give you the name of the 
top specialist in America and we can have him out here on the 
plane tonight, with your money that is, and if I think it neces- 
sary. But you can walk out of here and see your quack buddy 
or sweat while you decide to sec another doctor, or get 
referred to somebody incompetent. Then if it’s malignant and 
gets big enough they'll cut out your whole larynx or you’ll 
die. Or you can just sweat. Stick here with me and we can get 
it all squared away in a few hours. You got anything more 
important to do?’ 

Valenti said, ‘Let’s stick around, Johnny, what the hell. I’ll 
go down the hall and call the studio. 1 won’t tell them any- 
thing, just that we’re held up. Then I’ll come back here and 
keep you company.’ 

It proved to be a very long afternoon but a rewarding one. 
The diagnosis of the staff throat man was perfectly sound as 
far as Jules could see after the X-rays and swab analysis. Half- 
way through, Johnny Fontane, his mouth soaked, with iodine, 
retching over the roll of gauze stuck in his mouth, tried to 
quit. Nino Valenti grabbed him by the shoulders and slammed 
him back into the chair. When it was all over Jules grinned at 
Fontane and said, ‘Warts.' 

Fontane didn’t grasp it. Jules said again, ‘Just some warts. 
We'll slice them right off like skin off baloney. In a few months 
you'll be OK.' 

Valenti let out a yell but Fontane was still frowning. ‘How 
about singing afterwards, how will it affect my singing?* 


3^5 



Jules shrugged. ‘On that there’s no guarantee. But since 
you can’t sing now what’s the difference?’ 

Fontane looked at him with distaste. ‘Kid, you don’t know 
what the hell you’re talking about. You act like you’re giving 
me good news when what you’re telling me is maybe I 
won’t sing any more. Is that right, maybe I won’t sing any 
more?’ 

Finally Jules was disgusted* He’d operated as a real doctor 
and it had been a pleasure. He had done this bastard a real 
favour and he was acting as if he’d been done dirt. Jules said 
coldly, ‘Listen, Mr Fontane, I’m a doctor of medicine and you 
can call me Doctor, not kid. And I did give you very good 
news. When I brought you down here I was certain that you 
had a malignant growth in your larynx which would entail 
cutting out your whole vpice box. Or which could kill you. 
I was worried that I might have to tell you that you were a 
dead man. And I was so delighted when 1 could say the word 
“warts”. Because your singing gave me so much pleasure, 
helped me seduce girls when I was younger, and you’re a real 
artist. But also you’re a very spoiled guy. Do you think because 
you’re Johnny Fontane you can’t get cancet? Of a brain 
tumour that’s idoperable? Or a failure of the heart? Do you 
think you’re never going to die? Well, it’s not all sweet music 
and if you want lo see real trouble take a walk through this 
hospital and you’ll sing a love song about warts. So just stop 
the crap and get on with what you have to do. Your Adolphe 
Menjou medical man can get you the proper surgeon but if he 
tries to get into the operating room 1 suggest you have him 
arrested for attempted murder.’ 

Jules started to walk out of the room when Valenti said, 
‘Attaboy, Doc, that’s telling him.’ 

Jules whirled around and said, ‘Do you always get looped 
before noontime?* 

Valenti said, ‘ Sure,’ and grinned at him and with such good 
humour that Jules said more gently than he had meant to, 
‘ You have to figure you’ll be dead in five years if you keep that 
up.’ 

Valenti was lumbering up to him with little dancing steps. 
He threw his arms around Jules, his breath stank of bourbon. 



He was Jaughing very hard. ‘Five years?* he asked still laugh- 
ing. ‘Is it going to take that /ong?* 


A month after her operation Lucy Mancini sat beside the 
Vegas hotel pool, one hand holding a cocktail, the other hand 
stroking Jules’ head, which lay in her lap. 

‘You don’t have to build up your courage,’ Jules said 
tea singly. ‘I have champagne waiting in our suite.’ 

‘Arc you sure it’s OK so soon?’ Lucy asked. 

‘I’m the doctor,’ Jules said. ‘Tonight’s the big night. Do 
you realize I’ll be the first surgeon in medical history who tried 
out the results of his “medical first” operation? You know, 
the Before and After. I’m going ro enjoy writing it up for the 
journals. Let’s sec, “ while the Before was distinctly pleasurable 
for psychological reasons and the sophistication of the sur- 
geon-instructor, the post-operative coitus was extremely re- 
warding strictly for its neurological”’ - he stopped talking 
because Lucy had yanked on his hair hard enough for him ro 
yell with pain. 

She smiled down at him. ‘If you’re not satisfied tonight J 
can really say it’s your fault,’ she said. 

‘I guarantee my work. I planned it even though I just let 
old Kellner do the manual labour,’ Jules said. ‘Now let’s just 
rest up, we have a long night of research ahead.’ 

When they went up to their suite - they were living together 
now - Lucy found a surprise waiting: a gourmet supper and 
next to her champagne glass, a jeweller’s box with a huge dia- 
mond engagement ring inside it. 

‘ That shows you how much confidence I have in my work,’ 
Jules said. ‘Now let’s see you earn it.’ 

He was very tender, very gentle with her. She was a little 
scary at first, her flesh jumping away from his touch but then, 
reassured, she felt her body building up to a passion she had 
never known, and when they were done the first time and 
Jules whispered, ‘1 do good work,’ she whispered back, ‘Oh, 
yes, you do; yes, you do.’ And they both laughed to each other 
as they started making love again. 


5*5 



Book VI 


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 

A F ri . R r I V E months of exile in Sicily, Michael Corlcone came 
finally to understand his father’s character and his destiny. He 
came to understand men like Luca Brasi, the ruthless capo- 
regime Clcmen?:a, his mother’s resignation and acceptance of 
her role. For in Sicily he saw what they would have been if 
they had chosen not to stnigglc against their fate. He under- 
stood why the Don always said, ‘A man has only one destiny.’ 
He came to understand the contempt for authority and legal 
government, the hatred for any man who broke omertay the 
law of silence. 

Dressed in old clothes and a billed cap, Michael had been 
transported from the ship docked at Palermo to the interior 
of the Sicilian island, to the very heart of a province controlled 
by the Mafia, whe re the local capo-mafioso was greatly indebted 
to his fathet for some past service. The province held the town 
of Corlcone, whose name the Don had taken when he emi- 
grated to America so long ago. But there were no longer any 
of the Don’s relatives alive. The women had died of old age. 
All the men had been killed in vendettas or had also emigrated, 
cither America, Brazil or to some other province on the 
Italiari mainland. He was to learn later that this small poverty- 
stricken town had the highest murder rate of any place in the 
world. 

!Ntich:H'l was installed as a guest in the home of a bachelor 
uncle of thi, ftipn-W'fiow, The uncle, in his seventies, was also 
the doctor for the disirict. The capo-mafioso was a man in his 
laic fifties named Don Tommasino and he operated as the 
gabbeih/fo for a huge estate belonging to one of Sicily’s most 
noble families. gabbeliottOy a sort of overseer to the estates 
of the rich, also guaranteed that the poor would not try to 
claim land not being cultivated, would not try to encroach in 
any way on the estate, by poaching or trying to farm it as 

326 



squatters. In short, the gahhelioito was a mafioso who foi a cer- 
tain sum of money protected the real estate of the rich from all 
claims made on it by the poor, legal or ill eg. When any poor 
peasant tried to implement the law which permitted him to buy 
uncultivated land, the gubhillotit frightened him off with 
threats of bodily harm or death. It was that simple. 

Don Ttjmmasino also controlled the water rights in the area 
and vetoed the local building of any new dams bv the Roman 
government. Such dams would ruin the lucrative business of 
selling water from the artesian wells he controlled, make water 
too cheap, ruin the whole important water economy so 
laboriously built up over hundreds of years. However, Don 
Tommasino was an old-fashioned Mafia chief and would have 
nothing to do with dope traffic or prostitution. In this Don 
'1 ommasino w^as at odds with the new breed of Mafia leaders 
springing up in big cities like Palermo, new men who, in- 
fluenced by American gangsters deported to Italy, had no sucli 
scruples. 

The Mafia chief w^as an extremely portly man, a ‘man with a 
belly’, literally as well as in the figurative sense that meant a 
man able to inspire fear in his fellow men. Under his protec- 
tion, Michael had nothing to fear, vet it was considered neces- 
sary to keep the fugitive’s identity a secret. And so Michael 
was restricted to the walled estate of Dr Taza, the Don’s uncle. 

Dr Taza was tall for a Sicilian, almost six feet, and had ruddy 
cheeks and snow-white hair. Though in his sc venues, he went 
every week to Palermo to pay his respects to the younger 
prostitutes of that city, the younger the better. Dr Taza's 
other vice was reading. He read everything and talked about 
what he read to his fellow townsmen, parient^ who were 
illiterate peasants, the estate shepherds, and this gave him a 
local reputation for foolishness. What did books have to do 
with them? 

In the evenings Dr Taza, Don Tommasino and Michael sat 
in the huge garden populated with those marble statues that on 
this island seemed to grow out of the garden as magically as 
the black heady grapes. Dr Taza loved to tell stories about the 
Mafia and its exploits over the centuries and in Michael Cor- 
Icone he had a fascinated listener. There were times when even 


33^7 



Don Tommasino would be carried away by the balmy air, the 
fruity, intoxicating wine, the elegant and quiet comfort of the 
garden, and tell a story from his own practical experience. 
The doctor was the legend, the Don the reality. 

In this antique garden, Michael Corleone learned about the 
roots from which his father grew. That the word ‘Mafia’ had 
originally meant place of refiage. Then it became the name for 
the secret organization that sprang up to fight against the 
rulers that had crushed the country and its people for cen- 
turies. Sicily was a land that had been more cruelly raped than 
any other in history. The Inquisition had tortured rich and 
poor alike. The landowning barons and the princes of the 
Catholic Church exercised absolute pow’er over the shepherds 
and farmers. The police were the instruments of their power 
and so identified with them that to be called a policeman is the 
foulest insult one Sicilian can hurl at another. 

Faced with the savagery of this absolute power, the suftcring 
people learned never to betray their anger and their hatred for 
fear of being crushed. They learned never to make themselves 
vulnerable by uttering any sort of threat since giving such a 
warning insured a quick reprisal. They learned that society was 
their enemy and so when they sought redress for their wrongs 
they went to the rebel underground, the Mafia. And the Mafia 
cemented its power by originating the law of silence, the 
vmerta^ In the countryside of Sicily a stranger asking directions 
to the nearest town will not even receive the courtesy of an 
answer. And the greatest crime any member of the Mafia could 
commit would be to tell the police the name of the man who 
had just shot him or done him any kind of injury. Omerta be- 
came the religion of the people. A woman whose husband has 
been murdered would not tell the police the name of her hus- 
band’s murderer, not even of her child’s murderer, her 
daughter’s taper. 

Justice had never been forthcoming from the authorities and 
so the people had always gone to the Robin Hood Mafia. And 
to some extent the Mafia still fulfilled this role. People turned 
to their local capo-mafioso for help in every emergency. He teas 
their social worker, their district captain ready with a basket 
of food and a job, their protector. 

328 



liut what Dc Taza did not add, what Michael learned on his 
ow'n in the months that followed, was that the Mafia in Sicily 
had become the illegal arm of the rich and even the auxiliary 
|K)lice of the legal and political structure. It had become a 
degenerate capitalist structure, anti-communist, anti -liberal, 
placing its own taxes on every form of business endeavour no 
matter bow small. 

Michael Corleone understood for the first time why men like 
his father chose to become thieves and murderers rather than 
members of the legal society. The poverty and fear of degrada- 
tion were too awful to be acceptable to any man of spirit. And 
in America some emigrating Sicilians had assumed there would 
be an equally cruel authority. 

Dr Taza offered to take Michael into Palermo with him on 
his weekly visit to the bordello but Michael refused. His flight 
to Sicily had prevented him from getting proper medical 
treatment for his smashed jaw and he now carried a memento 
from Captain McCluskcy on the left side of his face. The bones 
had knitted badly, throwing his profile askew, giving him the 
appearance of depravity when viewed from that side. He had 
always been vain about his looks and this upset him more than 
he thought possible. The pain that came and went he didn’t 
mind at all. Dr Taza gave him some pills that deadened it. 
Taza offered to treat his face but Michael refused. He had been 
there long enough to learn that Dr Taza was perhaps the worst 
physician in Sicily. Dr Taza read everything but his medical 
literature, which he admitted he could not understand. He had 
passed his medical exams through the good offices of the most 
important Mafia chief in Sicily who had made a special trip 
to Palermo to confer with Taza’s professors aboujt what grades 
they should give him. And this too showed how the Mafia 
in Sicily was cancerous to the society it inhabited. Merit 
meant nothing. Talent meant nothing. Work meant nothing. 
The Mafia G^father gave you your profession as a gift. 

Michael had plenty of time to think things out. During the 
day he took walks in the countryside, always accompanied by 
two of the shepherds attached to Don Tommasino’s estate. 
The shepherds of the island were often recruited to act as the 
Mafia’s Ured killers and did their job simply to earn money to 

5Z9 



live. Michael thought about his £ather’8 organi2ation. If it 
continued to prosper it would grow into what had happened 
here on this island, so cancerous that it would destroy the 
whole country. Sicily was already a land of ghosts, its men 
emigrating to every other country on earth to be able to earn 
their bread, or simply to escape being murdered for exercising 
their political and economic freedoms. 

On his long walks the most striking thing in Michael’s eyes 
was the magnificent beauty of the country ; he walked through 
the orange orchards that formed shady deep caverns through 
the countryside with their ancient conduits splashing water out 
of the fanged mouths of great snake stones carved before Christ. 
Houses built like ancient Roman villas, with huge marble 
portals and great vaulted rooms, falling into ruins or in- 
habited bv stray sheep. On the horizon the bony hills shone 
like picked bleached bones piled high. Gardens and fields, 
sparkly green, decorated the desert landscape like bright emer- 
ald necldaces. And sometimes he walked as far as the town of 
Corleone, its eighteen thousand people strung out in dwellings 
that pitted the side of the nearest mountain, the mean hovels 
built out of black rock quarried from the mountain. In the last 
year there had been over sixty murders in Corleone and it 
seemed that death shadowed the town. Further on, the wood 
of Ficuzza broke the savage monotony of arable plain. 

His two shepherd bodyguards always carried their tuparas 
with them when accompanying Michael on his walks. The 
deadly Sicilian shotgun was the favourite weapon of the Mafia. 
Indeed the police chief sent by Mussolini to clean the Mafia out 
of Sicily had, as one of his first steps, ordered all stone walls 
in §icilv to be knocked down to not more than three feet in 
height so that murderers with their luparas could not use the 
walls as ambush points for their assassinations. This didn’t 
help much and the police minister solved his problem by 
arresting and deporting to penal colonies any male suspected 
of being a mafioso. 

When the island of Sicily was liberated by the Allied Armies, 
the American military government officials believed that any- 
one imprisoned by the Fascist regime was a democrat and 
many of these mafiosi were appointed as mayors of villages or 



interpreters to the military government. This good fortune 
enabled the Mafia to reconstitute itself and become more 
formidable than ever before. 

The long walks, a bottle of strong wine at night with a heavy 
plate of pasta and meat, enabled Michael to sleep. There were 
books in Italian in Dr Taza’s library and though Michael spoke 
dialect Italian and had taken some college courses in Italian, his 
reading of these books took a great deal of effort and time. 
His speech became almost accent less and, though he could 
never pass as a native of the district, it would be believed that 
be was one of those strange Italians from the far north of Italy 
bordering the Swiss and Germans. 

The distortion of the left side of his face made him more 
native. It was the kind of disfigurement common in Sicily 
because of the lack of medical care. The little injury that 
cannot be patched up simply for lack of money. Many children, 
many men, bore disfigurements that in America would have 
been repaired by minor surgery or sophisticated medical treat- 
ments. 

Michael often thought of Kay, of her smile, her body, and 
always felt a twinge of conscience at leaving her so brutally 
without a word of farewell. Oddly enough his conscience was 
never troubled by the two men he had murdered; Sollozzo 
had tried to kill his father. Captain McCluskey had disfigured 
him for life. 

Dr Taza always kept after him about getting surgery done 
for his lopsided face, especially when Michael asked him for 
pain-killing drugs, the pain getting worse as time went on, and 
more frequent. Taza explained that there was a facial nerve 
below the eye from which radiated a whole complex of nerves. 
Indeed, this was the favourite spot for Mafia torturers, who 
searched it out on the cheeks of their victims with the needle- 
fine point of an ice pick. That particular nerve in Michael’s 
face had been injured or perhaps there was a splinter of bone 
lanced into it. Simple surgery in a Palermo hospital would 
permanendy relieve the pain. 

Michael refused. When the doctor asked why, Michael 
grinned and said, 'It’s something from home.’ 

And he really didn’t mind the pain, which was more an ache. 


331 



a small throbbing in his skull, like a motored apparatus run- 
ning in liquid to purify it. 

It was nearly seven months of leisurely rustic living before 
Michael felt real boredom. At about this time Don Tommasino 
became very busy and was seldom seen at the villa. He was 
having his troubles with the 'new Mafia’ springing up in 
Palermo, young men who were making a fortune out of the 
postwar construction boom in that city. With this wealth they 
were trying to encroach on the country fiefs of old-time Mafia 
leaders whom they contemptuously labelled Moustache Petes. 
Don Tommasino was kept busy defending his domain. And so 
Michael was deprived of the old man’s company and had to 
be content with Dr Taza’s stories, which were beginning to 
repeat themselves. 

One morning Michael decided to take a long hike to the 
hiountains beyond Corleone. He was, naturally, accompanied 
by the two shepherd bodyguards. This was not really a pro- 
tection against enemies of the Corleone Family. It was simply 
too dangerous for anyone not a native to go wandering about 
by himself. It was dangerous enough for a native. The region 
was loaded with bandits, with Mafia partisans fighting against 
each other and endangering everybody else in the process. He 
might also be mistaken for a pagliaio thief. 

A pagliaio is a straw-thatched hut erected in the fields to 
house farming tools and to provide shelter for the agricultural 
labourers so that they will not have to carry them on the long 
walk from their homes in the village. In Sicily the peasant does not 
live on the land he cultivates. It is too dangerous and any arable 
land, if he owns it, is too precious. Rather, he lives in his village 
and at sunrise begins his voyage out to work in distant fields, a 
commuter on foot, A worker who arrived at his pagliaio and 
found it looted was an injured man indeed. The bread was 
taken out of his mouth for that day. The Mafia, after the 
law proved helpless, took this interest of the peasant under its 
protection and solved the problem in typical fashion. It hunted 
down and slaughtered all pagliaio thieves. It was inevitable 
that some innocents suffered. It was possible that if Michael 
wandered past a pagliaio that had just been looted he might be 
adjudged diecriinmal unless he had somebody tovouchfor him. 


35 * 



So on one sunny morning he started hiking across the fields 
followed by his two faithi^i shepherds. One of them was a 
plain simple fellow, almost moronic, silent as the dead and 
with a face as impassive as an Indian. He had the wiry build of 
the typical Sicilian before they ran to the fat of middle age. 
His name was Calo, 

The other shepherd was more outgoing, younger, and had 
seen something of the world. Mostly oceans, since he had been 
a sailor in the Italian navy during the war and had just had 
time enough to get himself tattooed before his ship was sunk 
and he was captured by the British. But the tattoo made him a 
famous man in his village. Sicilians do not often let themselves 
be tattooed, they do not have the opportunity nor the inclina- 
tion. (The shepherd, Fabrizzio, had done so primarily to cover 
a splotchy red birthmark on his belly.) And yet the Mafia 
market carts had gaily painted scenes on their sides, beautifully 
primitive paintings done with loving care. In any case, Fab- 
rizzio, back in his native village, was not too proud of that 
tattoo on his chest, though it showed a subject dear to the 
Sicilian ^ honour a husband stabbing a naked man and woman 
entwined together on the hairy floor of his belly. Fabrizzio 
would joke with Michael and ask questions about America, for 
of course it was impossible to keep them iri the dark about his 
true nationality. Still, they did not know exactly who he was 
except that he was in hiding and there could be no babbling 
about him. Fabrizzio sometimes brought Michael a fresh 
cheese still sweating the milk that formed it. 

They walked along dusty country roads passing donkeys 
pulling gaily painted carts. The land was filled with pink 
flowers, orange orchards, groves of almond and 61ive trees, all 
blooming. That had been one of the surprises- Michael had 
expected a barren land because of the legendary poverty of 
Sicilians. And yet he had found it a land of gushing plenty, 
carpcjted with flowers scented by lemon blossoms. It was so 
beautiful that he wondered how its people could bear to leave 
it. How terrible man had been to his fellow man could, be 
measured by the great exodus from what seemed to be a 
Garden of Eden. 

He had planned to walk to the coastal village of Mazara, and 

535 



'then take a bus back to Corleone in the evening, and so dre 
himself out and be able to sleep. The two shepherds wore 
rucksacks filled with bread and cheese they could eat on the 
way. They carried their luparas quite openly as if out for a day’s 
hunting. 

It was a most beautiful morning. Michael felt as he had felt 
when as a child he had gone out early on a summer day to play 
ball. Then each day had been freshly washed, freshly painted. 
And so it was now. Sicily was carpeted in gaudy flowers, the 
scent of orange and lemon blossoms so heavy that even with 
his facial injury which pressed on the sinuses, he could smell it. 

The smashing on the left side of his face had completely 
healed but the bone had formed improperly and the pressure 
on his sinuses made his left eye hurt. It also made his nose run 
continually, he filled up handkerchiefs with mucus and often 
blew his nose out on to the ground as the local peasants did, 
a habit that had disgusted him when he was a boy and had seen 
old Italians, disdaining handkerchiefs as English foppery, 
blow out their noses in the asphalt gutters. 

His face too felt * heavy’. Dr Taza had told him that this 
was due to the pressure on his sinuses caused by the badly 
healed fracture. Dr Taza called it an eggshell fracture of the 
zygoma; that if it had been treated before the bones knitted, it 
could have been easily remedied by a minor surgical procedure 
using an instrument like a spoon to push out the bone to its 
proper shape. Now, however, said the doctor, he would have 
to ^cck into a Palermo hospital and undergo a major pro- 
cedure called maxillo-facial surgery where the bone would be 
broken again. That was enough for Michael. He refused. And 
yet^more than the pain, more than the nose dripping, he was 
bothered by the feeling of heaviness in his face. 

He never reached the coast that day. After going about 
fifteen miles he and his shepherds stopped in the cool green 
watery shade of an orange grove to eat lunch and drink their 
wine. Fabrizzio was chattering about how he would someday 
get to America. After drinking and eating they lolled in the 
shade and Fabrizzio unbuttoned his shirt and contracted his 
stomach muscles to make the tattoo come alive. The naked 
couple on his chest writhed in a lover’s agony and the dagger 


534 



thrust by the husband quivered in their transfixed flesh. It 
amused them. It was while this was going on that Michael was 
hit with what Sicilians call ‘the thunderbolt*. 

Beyond the orange grove lay the green ribboned fields of a 
baronial estate. Down the road from the grove was a villa so 
Roman it looked as if it had been dug up from the ruins of 
Pompeii. It was a little palace with a huge marble portico and 
fluted Grecian columns and through those columns came a 
bevy of village girls flanked by two stout matrons clad in 
black. They were from the village and had obviously fulfilled 
their ancient duty to the local baron by cleaning his villa and 
otherwise preparing it for his winter sojourn. Now they were 
going into the fields to pick the flowers with which they would 
fill the rooms. They were gathering the pink suUa^ purple 
wisteria, mixing them with orange and lemon blossoms. The 
girls, not seeing the men resting in the orange grove, came 
closer and closer. 

They were dressed in cheap gaily printed frocks that clung 
to their bodies. They were still in their teens but with the full 
womanliness sun-drenched flesh ripened into so quickly. Three 
or four of them started chasing one girl, chasing her towards 
the grove. The girl being chased held a bunch of huge purple 
grapes in her left hand and with her right hand was picking 
grapes off the cluster and throwing them at her pursuers. She 
had a crown of ringleted hair as purple-black as the grapes and 
her body seemed to be bursting out of its skin. 

Just short of the grove she poised, startled, her eyes having 
caught the alien colour of the men’s shirts. She stood there up 
on her toes poised like a deer to run. She was very close now, 
close enough for the men to see every detail of her face. 

She was all ovals - oval-shaped eyes, the bones of her face, 
the contour of her brow. Her skin was an exquisite dark 
creaminess and her eyes, enormous, dark violet or brown but 
3ark with long heavy lashes shadowed her lovely face. Her 
mouth was rich without being gross, sweet without being weak 
and dyed dark red with the juice of the grapes. She was so 
incredibly lovely that Fabrizaio murmured, ‘Jesus Christ, take 
my soul, Fm dying,’ as a joke, but the words came out a little 
too hoarsely. As if she bad heard him^ the girl came down off 


535 



her toes and whirled away from them and fled back to her 
pursuers. Her haunches moved like an animal’s beneath the 
tight print of hei dress; as pagan and as innocently lustful. 
When she reached her friends she whirled around again and 
her face was like a dark hollow against the field of bright 
flowers. She extended an arm, the hand full of grapes pointed 
towards the grove. The girls fled laughing, with the black- 
clad, stout matrons scolding them on. 

As for Michael Corleone, he found himself standing, his 
heart pounding in his chest ; he felt a little dbaay. The blood was 
surging through his body, through all its extremities and 
pounding against the tips of his fingers, the tips of his toes. 
All the perfumes of the island came rushing in on the wind, 
orange, lemon blossoms, grapes, flowers. It seemed as if his 
body had sprung away from him out of himself. And then he 
heard the two shepherds laughing. 

‘You got hit by the thunderbolt, eh?* Fabriazio said, clap- 
ping him on the shoulder. Even Calo became friendly, patting 
him on the arm and saying, * Easy, man, easy,* but with affec- 
tion. As if Michael had been hit by a car. Fabrizzio handed him 
a wine bottle and Michael took a long slug. It cleared his head. 

‘What the hell are you damn sheep lovers talking about?’ 
he said. 

Both men laughed. Calo, his honest face filled with the ut- 
most seriousness, said, ‘You can’t hide the thunderbolt. When it 
hits you, everybody can see it. Christ, man, don’t be ashamed of it, 
some men pray for the thunderbolt. You’re a lucky feUow.’ 

Michael wasn’t too pleased about his emotions being so 
easily read. But this was the first time in his life such a thing 
had happened to him. It was nothing like his adolescent 
crushes, it was nothing like the love he’d had for Kay, a love 
based as much on her sweetness, her intelligence, and the pol- 
arity of the fair and dark. This was an overwhelming desire for 
possession, this was an inerasable printing of the girl’s face 
on his brain and he knew she would haunt his memory every 
day of his life if he did not possess her. His life had become 
simplified, focused on one point, everything else was unworthy 
of even a moment’s attention. During his exile he had always 
thought of Kay, though he felt they could never again he 



lovers or even friends. He was» after all was said, a morderer, 
a mafioso who had ‘made his bones’. But now Kay was wiped 
completely out of his consciousness. 

Fabrizzio said briskly, ‘I’ll go to the village, we’ll find out 
about her. Who knows, she may be more available than we 
think. There’s only one cure for the thunderbolt, eh, Calo?’ 

The other shepherd noddec^his head gravely. Michael didn’t 
say anything. He followed the two shepherds as they started 
down the road to the nearby village into which the flock of 
girls had disappeared. 

The village was grouped around the usual central square 
with its fountain. But it was on a main route so there were 
some stores, wine shops, and one litde caf(6 with three tables 
out on a small terrace. The shepherds sat at one of the tables 
and Michael joined them. There was no sign of the girls, not 
a trace. The village seemed deserted except for small boys and 
a meandering donkey. 

The proprietor of the cafi£ came to serve them. He was a 
short, burly man, almost dwarfish but he greeted them cheer- 
fully and set a dish of chickpeas at their table. ‘You’re 
strangers here,* he said, ‘so let me advise you. Try my wine. 
The grapes come from my own farm and it’s made by my 
sons themselves. They mix it with oranges and lemons. It’s 
the best wine in Italy.’ 

They let him bring the wme in a jug and it was even better 
than he claimed, dark purple and as powerful as a brandy. 
Fabrizzio said to the cafe proprietor, ‘You know all the girls 
here. I’ll bet. We saw some l^uties coming down the road, 
one in particular got our friend here hit with the thunderbolt.’ 
He motioned to Michael. 

The caff owner looked at Michael with new interest. The 
cracked face had seemed quite ordinary to him before, not 
worth a second glance. But a man hit with the thunderbolt 
was another matter. ‘You had better bring a few bottles home 
with you tonight, my friend,’ he said.. ‘You’ll need help in 
getting to sleep tonight.’ 

Michael asked the man, ‘ Do you know a girl with her hair 
all curly? Very creamy skin, very big eyes, very dark eyes. Do 
you know a girl like that in the village?’ 


337 



The cafif owner said curtly, ‘No. I don’t know any girl like 
that.’ He vanished from the terrace into his cafd. 

The three men drank their wine slowly, finished off the jug 
and called for more. The owner did not reappear. Fabrizzio 
went into the caf(6 after him. When Fabrizzio came out he 
grimaced and said to Michael, ‘Just as I thought, it’s his 
daughter we were talking about and now he’s in the back 
boiling up his blood to do us a mischief. I think we’d better 
start walking towards Corleone.* 

Despite his months on the island Michael still could not get 
used to the Sicilian touchiness on matters of sex, and this was 
extreme even for a Sicilian. But the two shepherds seemed to 
take it as a matter of course. They were waiting for him to leave. 
Fabrizzio said, ‘The old bastard mentioned he has two sons, 
big tough lads that he has only to whistle up. Let’s get going.’ 

Michael gave him a cold stare. Up to now he had been a 
quiet, gentle young man, a typical American, except that since 
he was hiding in Sicily he must have done something manly. 
This was the first time the shepherds had seen the Corleone 
stare. Don Tommasino, knowing Michael’s true identity and 
deed, had always been wary of him, treating him as a fellow 
‘man of respect’. But these unsophisticated sheep herders had 
come to their own opinion of Michael, and not a wise one. The 
cold look, Michael’s rigid white face, his anger that came oflF 
him like cold smoke off ice, sobered their laughter and snuffed 
out their familiar friendliness. 

When he saw he had their proper, respectful attention 
Michael said to them, ‘Get that man out here to me.’ 

They didn’t hesitate. They shouldered their luparas and went 
into the dark coolness of the caff. A few seconds later they 
reappeared with the cafe owner between them. The stubby 
man looked in no way frightened but his anger had a certain 
wariness about it. 

Michael leaned back in his chair and studied the man for a 
moment. Then he said very quietly, ‘I understand I’ve offended 
you by talking about your daughter. I offer you my apologies. 
I’m a stranger in this country, I don’t know the customs that 
well. Let me say this. I meant no disrespect to you or her.’ 

The shepherd bodyguards were impressed. Michael’s voice 

338 



had never sounded like this before when speaking to them. 
There was command and authority in it though he was making 
an apology. The caft owner shrugged, more wary still, know- 
ing he was not dealing with some farmboy. ‘ Who are you and 
what do you want from my daughter?’ 

Without even hesitating Michael said, ‘I am an American 
hiding in Sicily, from the police of my country. My name is 
Michael. You can inform the police and make yout fortune 
but then your daughter would lose a father rather than gain a 
husband. In any case I want to meet your daughter. With your 
permission and under the supervision of your family. With all 
decorum. With all respect. I’m an honourable man and I don’t 
think of dishonouring your daughter. I want to meet her, talk 
to her, and then if it hits us both right we’ll marry. If not, you’ll 
never see me again. She may find me unsympathetic after all, 
and no man can remedy that. But when the proper time comes 
I’ll tell you everything about me that a wife’s father should 
know.* 

All three men were looking at him with amazement. Fab- 
rizzio whispered in awe, ‘It’s the real thunderbolt.’ The cafe 
owner, for the first time, didn’t look so confident, or con- 
temptuous; his anger was hot so sure. Finally he asked, ‘Are 
you a friend of the friends?’ 

Since the word Mafia could never be uttered aloud by the 
ordinary Sicilian, this was as close as the cafi^ owner could 
come to asking if Michael was a member of the Mafia. It was 
the usual way of asking if someone belonged but it was 
ordinarily not addressed to the person directly concerned. 

‘No,’ Michael said. ‘I’m a stranger in this country.’ 

The caf(§ owner gave him another look, the smashed left 
side of his face, the long legs rare in Sicily. He took a look at 
the two shepherds carrying their iuparas quite openly without 
fear and remembered how they had come into his caff and 
told him their padrone wanted to talk to him. The caff owner 
had snarled that he wanted the son of a bitch out of his terrace 
and one of the shepherds had said, ‘Take my word, it’s best 
you go out and speak to him yourself,’ And something had 
made him come out. Now something made him realize that it 
would be best to show this stranger some courtesy. He said 


519 



grudgingly, *Come Sunday afternoon. My name is Vitelli and 
my house is up there on the hill, above the village. But come 
here to the cafif and I’ll take you up.’ 

Fabtizzio started to say something but Michael gave him one 
look and the shepherd’s tongue froze in his mouth. This was 
not lost on Vitelli. So when Michael stood up and stretched 
out his hand, the caf^ owner took it and smiled. He would 
make some inquiries and if the answers were wrong he could 
always greet Michael with his two sons bearing their own 
shotguns. The caf<^ owner was not without his contacts among 
the * friends of the friends’. But something told him this was 
one of those wild strokes of good fortune diat Sicilians always 
believed in, something told him that his daughter’s beauty 
would make her fortune and her family secure. And it was just 
as well. Some of the local youths were already beginning to 
buzz around and this stranger with his broken face could do the 
necessary job of scaring them off. Vitelli, to show his goodwill, 
sent the strangers off with a bottle of his best and coldest wine. 
He noticed that one of the shepherds paid the bill. This im- 
pressed him even more, made it clear that Michael was the 
superior of the two men who accompanied him. 

Michael was no longer interested in his hike. They foimd a 
garage and hired a car and driver to take them back to Cor- 
leonc, and some time before supper. Dr Taza must have been 
informed by the shepherds of what had happened. That even- 
ing, sitting in the garden. Dr Taza said to Don Tommasino, 
*Our friend got hit by the thunderbolt today.’ 

Don Tommasino not seem surprised. He grunted. * I 
wish some of those young feUows in Palermo would get a 
thunderbolt, maybe I could get some peace.’ He was talking 
about the new-style Maha chiefs rising in the big cities like 
Palermo and challenging the power of old-regime stalwarts 
like himself. 

Michael said to Tommasino, want you to tell those two 
sheep herders to leave me alone Sunday. I’m going to go to 
this girl’s family for dinner and I don’t want them hanging 
around.’ 

Don Tommasino shook his head. H’m responsible to your 
father for you, don’t ask me that. Another thing, I hear you’ve 


340 



even talked marriage. I can’t aOow that until I’ve sent some- 
body to speak to your father.’ 

Michael Corleone was very careful, this was after all a man 
of respect. *Don Tommasino, you know my father. He’s a 
man who goes deaf when somebody says the word no to him. 
And he doesn’t get his hearing back until they answer him 
with a yes. Well, he has heard my no many times. I understand 
about the two guards, I don’t want to cause you trouble, they 
can come with me Sunday, but if I want to marry I’ll marry. 
Surely if I don’t permit my own father to interfere with my 
personal life it would 'be an insult to him to allow you to do so.’ 

The capo-mafioso sighed. ‘ Well, then, marriage it will have to 
be. I know your thunderbolt. She’s a good girl from a re- 
spectable family. You can’t dishonour them without the father 
trying to kill you, and then you’ll have to shed blood. Besides, 
[ know the family well, I can’t allow it to happen.’ 

Michael said, * She may not be able to stand ^e sight of me, 
and she’s a very young girl, she’ll think me old.’ He saw the 
two men smiling at him. ^Fll need some money for presents 
and I think I’ll need a car.’ 

The Don nodded. ‘Fabrizaio will take care of everything, 
he’s a clever boy, they taught him mechanics in the navy. I’ll 
give you some money in the morning and I’ll let your father 
know what’s happening. That I must do.’ 

Michael said to Dr Taza, ‘Have you got anything that can 
dry up this damn snot always coming out of my nose? I can’t 
have that girl seeing me wiping it all the time.’ 

Dr Taza said, ‘ I’ll coat it with a drug before you have to see 
her. It makes your flesh a little numb but, don’t worry, you 
won’t be kissing her for a while yet.’ Both doctor and Don 
smiled at this witticism. 

By Sunday, Michael had an Alfa Romeo, battered but ser- 
viceable, He had also made a bus trip to Palermo to buy pre- 
sents for the girl and her family. He had learned that the girl’s 
name was Apollonia and every night he thought of her lovely 
face and her lovely naxtie. He had to drink a good deal of wine 
to get some sleep and orders were given to the old women ser- 
vants in the house to leave a chilled bottle at his bedside. He 
drank it empty every night. 


541 



On Sunday, to the tolling qf church bells that coveted aU of 
Sicily, he drove the Alfa R<)mco to the village and parked it 
just outside the caffe. Calo and Fabrizaio were in the back seat 
with their luparas and Michael told them they were to wait in 
the caffe, they were not to come to the house. The caffe was 
closed but Vitelli was there waiting for them, leaning against 
the railing of his empty terrace. 

They shook hands aU around and Michael took the three 
packages, the presents, and trudged up the hill with Vitelli to 
his home. This proved to be larger than the usual village hut, 
the Vitellis were not poverty-stricken. 

Inside the house was familiar with statues of the Madonna 
entombed in glass, votive lights flickering redly at their feet. 
The two sons were waiting, also dressed in their Sunday black. 
They were two sturdy young men just out of their teens but 
lool^g older because of their hard work on the farm. The 
mother was a vigorous woman, as stout as her husband. There 
was no sign of the girl. 

After the introductions, which Michael did not even hear, 
they sat in the room that might possibly have been a living 
room or just as easily the formal dining room. It was cluttered 
with all Idnds of furniture and not very large but for Sicily it 
was middle-class splendour. 

Michael gave Signor Vitelli and Signora Vitelli their pre- 
sents. For the father it was a gold cigar-cutter, for the mother 
a bolt of the finest cloth purchasable in Palermo. He still had 
one package for the girl. His presents were received with 
reserved thanks. The gifts were a little too premature, he 
should not have given anything until his second visit. 

,Thc father said to him, in man-to-man country fashion, 
‘DonH think we’re so of no account to welcome strangers into 
our house so easily. But Don Tommasino vouched for you per- 
sonally and nobody in this province would ever doubt the word 
of that good man. And so we make you welcome. But I must 
tell you that if your intentions are serious about my daughter, 
we will have to know a little more about you and your family. 
You can understand, your family is from this country.* 

Michael nodded and said politely, ‘I wiU tell you anything 
you want to know any time.* 


54 * 



Signor Vitelli held up a hand. ‘I'm not a nosy man. Let’s see 
if it's necessary first. Right now you're welcome in my house 
as a friend of Don Tommasino.* 

Despite the drug painted inside his nose, Michael actually 
smelled the girl’s presence in the room. He turned and she was 
standing in the arched doorway that led to the back of the 
house. The smell was of fresh flowers and lemon blossoms but 
she wore nothing in her hair of jet black curls, nothing on her 
plain severe black dress, obviously her Sunday best. She gave 
him a quick glance and a tiny smile before she cast her eyes 
down dt;murely and sat down next to her mother. 

Again Michael felt that shortness of breath, that flooding 
through his body of something that was not so much desire 
as an insane possessiveness. He understood for the first time 
the classical jealousy of the Italian male. He was at that moment 
ready to kill anyone who touched this girl, who tried to claim 
her, take her away from him. He wanted to own her as wildly 
as a miser wants to own gold coins, as hungrily as a share- 
cropper wants to own his own land. Nothing was going to 
stop him from owning this girl, possessing her, locking her in 
a house, and keeping her prisoner only for himself. He didn’t 
want anyone even to see her. When she turned to smile at one 
of her brothers Michael gave that young man a murderous 
look without even realizing it. The family could sec it was a 
classical case of the ‘thunderbolt’ and they were reassured. 
This young man would be putty in their daughter's hands until 
they were married. After that of course things would change 
but it wouldn't matter. 

Michael had bought himself some new clothes in Palermo 
and was no longer the roughly dressed peasant, and it was 
obvious to the family that he was a Don of some kind. His 
smashed face did not make him as evil-looking as he believed; 
because his other profile was so handsome it made the dis- 
figurement interesting even. And in any case this was a land 
where to be called disfigured you had to compete with a host 
of men who had suffered extreme physical misfortune. 

Michael looked directly at the girl, the lovely ovab of her 
face. Her lips now he could see were almost blue so dark was 
the blood pulsating in them. He said, not daring to speak her 


545 



name, ‘ I saw you by the orange groves the other day. When 
you ran away. I hope I didn’t frighten you?’ 

The girl raised her eyes to him for just a fraction. She shook 
her head. But the loveliness of those eyes had made Michael 
look away. The mother said tartly, *Apollonia, speak to the 
poor fellow, he’s come miles to sec you,' but the girl’s long 
jet lashes remained closed like wings over her eyes. Michael 
handed her the present wrapped in gold paper and the girl 
put it in her lap. The father said, ‘ Open it, girl,’ but her hands 
did not move. Her hands were small and brown, an urchin’s 
hands. The mother reached over and opened the package 
impatiently, yet careful not to tear the precious paper. The red 
velvet jeweller’s box gave her pause, she had never held such 
a thing in her hands and didn’t know how to spring its catch. 
But she got it open on pure instinct and then took out the 
present. 

It was a heavy gold chain to be worn as a necklace, and it 
awed them not only because of its obvious value but because 
a gift of gold in this society was also a statement of the most 
serious intentions. It was no less than a proposal of matrimony, 
or rather the signal that there was the intention to propose 
matrimony. They could no longer doubt the seriousness of 
this stranger. And they could not doubt his substance. 

ApoUonia still had not touched her present. Her mother 
held it up for her to sec and she raised those long lashes for a 
moment and then she looked directly at Michael, her doelike 
^ brown eyes grave, and said, 'Gratia* It was the first time he 
had heard her voice. 

It had all the velvety softness of youth and shyness and it set 
Michael’s ears ringing. He kept looking away from her and 
talking to the father and mother simply because looking at her 
confused him so much. But he noticed that despite the con- 
servative looseness of her dress her body almost shone through 
the cloth with sheer sensuality. And he noticed the darkening 
of her skin blushing, the dark creamy skin, going darker with 
the blood surging to her face. 

Finally Michael rose to go and the family rose too. They said 
their goodbyes formaUy, the girl at last confronting him as 
they shook hands, and he felt the shock of her skin on his 


344 



skin, her skin warm and rough, peasant skin. The father 
walked down the hill with him to his car and invited him to 
Sunday dinner the next week. Michael nodded but knew he 
couldn’t wait a week to see the girl again. 

fie didn’t. The next day, without his shepherds, he drove to 
the village and sat on the garden terrace of the caft to chat with 
her father. Signor Vitelli took pity on him and sent for his wife 
and daughter to come down to the caf(6 to join them. This 
meeting was less awkward. The girl Apollonia was less shy, 
and spoke more. She was dressed in her everyday print frock 
which suited her colouring much better. 

The next day the same thing happened. Only this time 
Apollonia was wearing the gold chain he had given her. He 
smiled at her then, knowing that this was a signal to him. He 
walked with her up the hill, her mother close behind them. 
But it was impossible for the two young people to keep their 
bodies from brushing against each other and once Apollonia 
stumbled and fell against him so that he had to hold her and her 
body so warm and alive in his hands started a deep wave of 
blood rising in his body. They could not sec the mother behind 
them smiling because her daughter was a mountain goat and 
had not stumbled on this path since she was an infant in diapers. 
And smiling because this was the only way this young man was 
going to get his hands on her daughter until the marriage. 

This went on for two weeks. Michael brought her presents 
every time he came and gradually she became less shy. But 
they could never meet without a chaperone being present. She 
was just a village girl, barely literate, with no idea of the world, 
but she had a freshness, an eagerness for life that, with help 
of the language barrier, made her seem interesting. Everything 
went very swiftly at Michael’s request. And because the girl 
was not only fascinated by him but knew he must be rich, a 
wedding date was set for the Sunday two weeks away. 

Now Don Tommasino took a hand. He had received word 
from America that Michael was not subject to orders but that 
all elementary precautions should be taken. So Don Tom- 
masino appointed himself the parent of the bridegroom to 
insure the presence of his own bodyguards. Calo and Fab- 
rizzio were also members of the wedding party from Corleone 


345 



siS Dr Taza. The bride and groom would live in Dr Ta7a’s 
villa .surrounded by its stone wall. 

The wedding was the usual peasant one. The villagers stood 
in the streets and threw flowers as the bridal party, principals 
and guests, went on foot from the church to the bride’s home. 
The wedding procession pelted the neighbours with sugar- 
coated almonds, the traditional wedding candies, and with 
candies left over made sugary white mountains on the bride’s 
wedding bed, in this case only a symbolic one since the first night 
would be spent in the villa outside Corleone. The wedding 
feast went on until midnight but bride and groom would leave 
before that in the Alfa Romeo. When that time came Michael 
was surprised to find that the mother was coming with them 
to the Corleone villa at the request of the bride. The father 
explained: the girl was young, a virgin, a little frightened, she 
would need someone to talk to on the morning following her 
bridal night ; to put her on the right track if things went wrong. 
These matters could sometimes get very tricky. Michael saw 
Apollonia looking at him with doubt in her huge doe-brown 
eyes. He smiled at her and nodded. 

And so it came about that they drove back to the villa out- 
side Corleone with the mother-in-law in the car. But the older 
woman immediately put her head together with the servants 
of Dr Taza, gave her daughter a hug and a kiss and disap- 
peared from the scene. Michael and his bride were allowed to 
go to their huge bedroom alone. 

Apollonia was still wearing her bridal costume with a cloak 
thrown over it. Her trunk and case had been brought up to 
the room from the car. On a small table was a bottle of wine 
ahd a plate of small wedding cakes. The huge canopied bed 
was never out of their vision. The young girl in the centre of 
the room waited for Michael to make the first move. 

And now that he had her alone, now that he legally possessed 
her, now that there was no barrier to his enjoying that body 
and face he had dreamed about every night, Michael could not 
bring himself to approach her. He watched as she took off 
the bridal shawl and draped It over a chair, and placed the 
bridal crown on the small dressing table. That table had 
an array of perfumes and creams that Michael had had sent 

546 



from Palermo. The girl tallied them with her eyes fot a 
moment. 

Michael turned off the lights, thinking the girl was waiting 
for some darkness to shield her body wl^e she undressed. But 
the Sicilian moon came through ^e unshuttered windows, 
bright as gold, and Michael went to close the shutters but not 
all the way, the room would be too warm. 

The girl was still standing by the table and so Michael went 
out of the room and down the hall to the bathroom. He and 
Dr Taaa and Don Tommasino had taken a glass oi wine to- 
gether in the garden while the women had prepared themselves 
for bed. He had expected to find ApoUonia in her nightgown 
when he returned, already between the covers. He was sur- 
prised that the mother had not done this service fot her 
daughter. Maybe ApoUonia had wanted him to help her to 
undress. But he was certain she was too shy, too innocent fot 
such forward behaviour. 

Coming back into the bedroom, he found it completely 
dark, someone had closed the shutters aU the way. He groped 
his way towards the bed and could make out the shape of 
ApoUonia’s body lying under the covers, her back to him, her 
body curved away from him and huddled up. He undressed 
and slipped naked beneath the sheets. He stretched out one 
hand and touched silky naked skin. She had not put on her 
gown and this boldness delighted him. Slowly, carefuUy, he 
put one hand on her shoulder and pressed her body gently so 
that she would turn to him. She turned slowly and his hand 
touched her breast, soft, full and then she was in his arms 
so quickly that their bodies came together in one line of 
silken electricity and he finaUy had his arms aroimd her, was 
kissing her warm mouth deeply, was crushing her body and 
breasts against him and then rolling his body on top of 
hers. 

Her flesh and hair, taut silk, now she was all eagerness, 
surging against him wildly in a virginal erotic frenzy. When 
he entered her she gave a little gasp and was still for just a 
second and then in a powerful forward thrust of her pelvis she 
locked her satiny legs around his hips. When they came to the 
end they were locked together so fiercely, straining against 


347 



each other so violently, that idling away from each othet was 
like the tremble before death. 

That night and the weeks that followed, Michael Corleone 
came to understand the premium put on virginity by socially 
primitive people. It was a period of sensuality that he had never 
before experienced, a sensuality mixed with a feeling of mas- 
culine power. Apollonia in those hrst days became almost his 
slave. Given trust, given affection, a young fiiU-blooded girl 
aroused from virginity to erotic awareness was as delicious as 
an exactly ripe fruit. 

She on her part brightened up the rather gloomy masculine 
atmosphere of the villa. She had packed her mother off the 
very next day after her bridal night and presided at the com- 
munal table with bright girlish charm. Don Tommasino dined 
with them every night and Dr Taza told aU his old stories as 
they drank wine in the garden full of statues garlanded with 
blood -red flowers, and so the evenings passed pleasantly 
enough. At night in their bedroom the newly married couple 
spent hours of feverish lovemaking. Michael could not get 
enough of Apollonia’s beautifully sculpted body, her honey- 
coloured skin, her huge brown eyes glowing with passion. 
She had a wonderfully fresh smell, a fleshly smeU perfumed by 
her sex yet almost sweet and unbearably aphro^siacal. Her 
virginal passion matched his nuptial lust and often it was dawn 
when they fell into an exhausted slumber. Sometimes, spent 
but not yet ready for sleep, Michael sat on the window ledge 
and stared at Apollonia’s naked body while she slept. Her face 
too was lovely in repose, a perfect face he had seen before only 
in art books of painted Italian Madonnas who by no stretch of 
the artist’s skill could be thought virginal. 

' In the first week of their marriage they went on picnics and 
smaU trips in the Alfa Romeo. But then Don Tommasino took 
Michael aside and explained that the marriage had made his 
presence and identity common knowledge in that part of 
Sicily and precautions had to be taken against the enemies of 
the Corleone Family, whose long arms also stretched to this island 
refuge. Don Tommasino put armed guards around his villa 
and the two shepherds, Calo and Fabrmio, were fixtures inside 
the walls. So Michael and his wife had to remain on the villa 

548 



grounds. Michael passed the time by teaching Apollonia to 
read and write English and to drive the car along the inner 
walls of the villa. About this time Don Tommasino seemed to 
be preoccupied and poor company, he was stiU having trouble 
wi^ the new Mafia in the town of Palermo, Dr Taza said. 

One night in the garden an old village woman who worked 
in the house as a servant brought a dish of fresh olives and 
then turned to Michael and said, ‘ Is it true what everybody is 
saying that you are the son of Don Corleone in New York 
City, the Godfather?* 

Michael saw Don Tommasino shaking his head in disgust 
at the general knowledge of their secret. But the old crone was 
looking at him in so concerned a fashion, as if it was important 
for her to know the truth, that Michael nodded. 'Do you know 
my father?’ he asked. 

'pie woman’s name was Filomena and her face was as 
wrinkled and brown as a walnut, her brown^stained teeth 
showing through the shell of her flesh. For the first time since 
he had been in the villa she smiled at him. 'The Godfather 
saved my life once,’ she said, 'and my brains too.’ She made 
a gesture towards her head. 

She obviously wanted to say something else so Michael 
smiled to encourage her. She asked almost fearfully, ' Is it true 
that Luca Brasi is dead?’ 

Michael nodded again and was surprised at the look of 
release on the old woman’s face. Filomena crossed herself and 
said, ‘God forgive me, but may his soul roast in hell for eter- 
nity.’ 

]^chael remembered his old curiosity about Brasi, and had 
the sudden intuition that this woman knew the story Hagen 
and Sonny had refused to tell him. He poured the woman a 
glass of wine and made her sit down. ‘ Tell me about my father 
and Luca Brasi,’ he said gently. 'I know some of it, but how 
did they become friends and why was Brasi so devoted to my 
father? Don’t be afraid, come tell me.* 

Filomena’s wrinkled face, her raisin-black eyes, turned to 
Don Tommasino, who in some way signalled his permission. 
And so Filomena passed the evening for them by telling her 
story. 


H9 



Thirty years before, Filomena had been a midwife in New 
York Qty, on Tenth Avenue, servicing the Italian colony. 
The women were always pregnant and she prospered. She 
taught doctors a few things when they tried to interfere in a 
difficult birth. Her husband was then a prosperous grocery 
store owner, dead now' poor soul, she blessed him, though he 
had been a card player and wcnchcr who never thought to put 
aside for hard times. In any event one cursed night thirty 
years ago when all honest people were long in their beds, there 
came a knocking on Filomena’s door. She was by no means 
frightened, it was the quiet hour babes prudently chose to 
enter safely into this sinful world, and so she dressed and 
opened the door. Outside it was Luca Brasi whose reputation 
even then was fearsome. It was known also that he was a 
bachelor. And so Filomena was immediately frightened. She 
thought he had come to do her husband harm, that perhaps 
her husband had foolishly refused Brasi some smaU favour. 

But Brasi had come on the usual errand. He told Filomena 
that there was a woman about to give birth, that the house 
was out of the neighbourhood some distance away and that 
she was to come with him. Filomena immediately sensed some- 
thing was amiss. Brasi’s brutal face looked almost like that of a 
madman that night, he was obviously in the grip of some 
demon. She tried to protest that she attended only women 
whose history she knew but he shoved a handful of green 
dollars in her hand and ordered her roughly to come along 
with him. She was too frightened to refuse. 

In the street was a Ford, its driver of the same feather as 
Luca Brasi. The drive was no more than thirty minutes to a 
small frame house in Long Island City right over the bridge. A 
two-family house but obviously now tenanted only by Brasi 
and his gang. For there were some other ruffians in the kitchen 
playing cards and drinking. Brasi took Filomena up the stairs to 
a bedroom. In the bed was a young pretty girl who looked Irish, 
her face painted, her hair red; and with a belly swollen like a 
sow. The poor girl was so frightened. When she saw Brasi she 
turned her head away in terror, yes terror, and indeed the look 
of hatred on Brasi’s evil face was the most frightening thing she 
had ever seen in her life. (Here Filomena crossed herself again.) 


350 



To make a long story short, Btasi left the room. Two <^his 
men assisted the midwife and the baby was bom, the mother 
was exhausted and went into a deep sleep. Brasi was sum- 
moned and Filomena, who had wrapped the newborn child 
in an extra blanket, extended the bun^e to him and said, ‘ If 
you’re the father, take her. My work is finished.’ 

Brasi glared at her, malevolent, insanity stamped on his face. 
‘Yes, I’m the father,* he said. *But I don’t want any of that 
race to live. Take it down to the basement and throw it into 
the furnace.’ 

For a moment Filomena thought she had not understood 
him properly. She was puazled by his use of the word ‘race’. 
Did he mean because the girl was not Italian ? Or did he mean 
because the girl was obviously of the lowest type; a whore in 
short ? Or did he mean that anything springing from his loins 
he forbade to live. And then she was sure he was making a 
brutal joke. She said shortly, *It*s your child, do what you 
want.’ And she tried to hand him the btmdle. 

At this time the exhausted mother awoke and turned on her 
side to face them. She was just in time to see Brasi thrust vio- 
lently at the btindJe, crushing the newborn infant against Filo- 
mena’s chest. She called out weakly, ‘ Luc, Luc, I’m sorry,’ and 
Brasi turned to face her. 

It was terrible, Filomena said now. So terrible. They were 
like two mad animals. They were not human. The hatred they 
bore each other blazed through the room. Nothing else, not 
even the newborn infant, existed for them at that moment. 
And yet there was a strange passion. A bloody, demonical lust 
so unnatural you knew they were damned forever. Then Luca 
Brasi turned back to Filomena and said harshly,* ‘Do what I 
tell you. I’ll make you rich.’ 

Filomena could not speak in her terror. She shook her head. 
Finally she managed to whisper, ‘You do it, you’re the father, 
do it if you like.’ But Brasi didn’t answer. Instead he drew a 
knife from inside his shirt. ‘I’ll cut your throat,* he said. 

She must have gone into shock then because the next thing 
she remembered they were all standing in the basement of the 
house in front of a square iron furnace, Filomena was stiU 
holding the blanketed baby, which had not made a sound. 


35 * 



(Maybe if it had cried, maybe if I had been shrewd enough to 
pinch it, Filomena said, that monster would have shown 
mercy.) 

One of the men must have opened the furnace door, the fire 
now was visible. And then she was alone with Brasi in that 
basement with its sweating pipes, its mousy odour. Brasi had 
his knife out again. And ^cre could be no doubting that he 
would kill her. There were the flames, there were Brasi*s eyes. 
His face was the gargoyle of the devil, it was not human, it was 
not sane. He pushed her towards the open furnace door. 

At this point, Filomena fell silent. She folded her bony 
hands in her lap and looked directly at Michael. He knew what 
she wanted, how she wanted to tell him, without using her 
voice. He asked gently, ‘Did you do it?’ She nodded. 

It was only after another glass of wine and crossing herself 
and muttering a prayer that she continued her story. She was 
given a bundle of money and driven home. She understood 
that if she uttered a word about what had happened she would 
be killed. But two days later Brasi murdered the young Irish 
girl, the mother of the infant, and was arrested by the police. 
Filomena, frightened out of her wits, went to the Godfather 
and told her story. He ordered her to keep silent, that he would 
attend to everything. At that time Brasi did not work for Don 
Qirleone. 

Before Don Corleone could set matters right, Luca Brasi 
tried to commit suicide in his cell, hacking at ^s throat with a 
piece of glass. He was transferred to the prison hospital and by 
the time he recovered Don Corleone had arranged everything. 
The police did not have a case they could prove in court and 
Luca Brasi was released. 

Though Don Corleone assured Filomena that she had 
notiling to fear from either Luca Brasi or the police, she had 
no peace. Her nerves were shattered and she could no longer 
work at her profession. Finally she persuaded her husband to 
sell the grocery store and they returned to Italy. Her husband 
was a good man, had been told everything and understood. 
But he was a weak man and in Italy squandered the fortune 
they had both slaved in America to earn. And so after he died 
she had become a servant So Filomena ended her story. She 


53 * 



had another glass of wine and said to Michael, *1 bless the 
name of your father. He always sent me money when I asked, 
he saved me from Brasi. Tell him I say a prayer for his soul 
every night and that he shouldn’t fear dying.’ 

After she had left, Michael asked Don Tommasino, Ts her 
story true?’ The capo-mafioso nodded. And Michael thought, 
no wonder nobody had wanted to tell him the story. Some 
story. Some Luca. 

The next morning Michael wanted to discuss the whole 
thing with Don Tommasino but learned that the old man had 
been called to Palermo by an urgent message delivered by a 
courier. That evening Don Tommasino returned and took 
Michael aside. News had come from America, he said. News 
that it grieved him to tell. Santino Corleone had been killed. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 

The Sicilian sun, early-morning lemon-coloured, filled 
Michael’s bedroom. He awoke and, feeling Apollonia’s satiny 
body against his own sleep-warm skin, made her come awake 
with love. When they were done, even all the months of com- 
plete possession could not stop him from marvelling at her 
beauty and her passion. 

She left the bedroom to wash and dress in the bathroom 
down the hall. Michael, still naked, the morning sun refreshing 
bis body, lit a cigarette and relaxed on the bed. This was the 
last morning they would spend in this house and the villa. Don 
Tommasino had arranged for him to be transferred to another 
town on the southern coast of Sicily. Apollonia, in the first 
month of pregnancy, wanted to visit with her family for a 
few weeks and would join him at the new hiding place after 
the visit. 

The night before, Don Tommasino had sat with Michael in 
the garden after Apollonia had gone to bed. The Don had been 
worried and tired, and admitted that he was concerned about 
Michael’s safety. *Your marriage brought you into sight,’ he 

353 


^ Godfittber — 12 



told Michael. 'Fm surprised your father hasn’t made arrange- 
ments for you to go some place else. In any case Fm having my 
own troubles with the young Turks in Palermo. Fve offered 
some fair arrangements so that they can wet their beaks more 
than they deserve, but those scum want everything. T can’t 
understand their attitude. They’ve tried a few little tricks but 
Fm not so easy to kill. They must know Fm too strong for 
them to hold me so cheaply. But that’s the trouble with young 
people, no matter how talented. They don’t reason things out 
and they want all the water in the well.’ 

And then Don Tommasino had told Michael that the two 
shepherds, Fabrizaio and Calo, would go with him as body- 
guards in the Alfa Romeo. Don Tommasino would say his 
goodbyes tonight since he would be off early in the morning, 
at dawn, to see to his affairs in Palermo. Also, Michael was not 
to tell Dr Taza about the move, since the doctor planned to 
spend the evening in Palermo and might blab. 

Michael had known Don lommasino was in trouble. 
Armed guards patrolled the walls of the villa at night and a 
few faithful shepherds with their luparas were always in the 
house. Don Tommasino himself went heavily armed and a 
personal bodyguard attended him at all times. 

The morning sun was now too strong. Michael stubbed out 
his cigarette and put on work pants, work shirt, and the peaked 
cap most Sicilian men wore. Still barefooted, he leaned out his 
bedroom window and saw Fabrizzio sitting in one of the 
garden chairs. Fabrizzio was lazily combing his thick dark hair, 
his lupara was carelessly thrown across the garden table. 
Michael whistled and Fabrizzio looked up to his window. 

‘ Get the car,’ Michael called down to him. ‘ Fll be leaving in 
five minutes. Where’s Calo?’ 

Fabrizzio stood up. His shirt was open, exposing the blue 
and red lines of the tattoo on his chest. ‘ Calo is having a cup of 
coffee in the kitchen,’ Fabrizzio said, ‘Is your wife coming 
with you?’ 

Michael squinted down at him. It occurred to him that Fab- 
rizzio had been following Apollonia too much with his eyes 
the last few weeks. Not that he would dare ever to make an 
advance towards the wife of a friend of the Don’s. In Sicily 


354 



there was no surer road to death. Michael said coldly, *No, 
she’s going to her family first, she’U join us in a few days.* He 
watched Fabthczio hurry into the stone hut that served as a 
garage for the Alfa Romeo. 

Michael went down the hall to wash. Apollonia was gone. 
She was most likely in the kitchen preparing his breakfast with 
her own hands to wash out the milt sh^ felt because she wanted 
to see her family one more timcT>cfore going so far away to the 
other end of Sicily. Don Tommasino would arrange trans- 
portation for her to where Michael would be. 

Down in the kitchen the old woman Fdomena brought him 
his coffee and shyly bid him a goodbye. ‘FU remember you to 
my father,’ Michael said and she nodded. 

Calo came into the kitchen and said to Michael, * The car’s 
outside, shall I get your bag?’ 

*No, FU get it,’ Michael said. ‘Where’s ApoUa?’ 

Calo’s face broke into an amused grin. ‘ She’s sitting in the 
driver’s seat of the car, dying to step on the gas. She’ll be a 
real American woman before she gets to America.’ It was un- 
heard of for one of the peasant women in Sicily to attempt 
driving a car. But Michael sometimes let Apollonia guide the 
Alfa Romeo around the inside of the villa walls, always beside 
her however because she sometimes stepped on the gas when 
she meant to step on the brake. 

Michael said to Gilo, * Get Fabri22io and wait for me in the 
car.’ He went out of the kitchen and ran up the stairs to the 
bedroom. His bag was already packed. Before picking it up he 
looked out the window and saw the car parked in front of the 
portico steps rather than the kitchen entrance. Apollonia was 
sitting in the car, her hands on the wheel like a child playing. 
Calo was just putting the lunch basket in the rear seat. And 
then Michael was annoyed to see Fabrizzio disappearing 
through the gates of the villa on some errand outside. What 
the hell was he doing? He saw Fabrizzio take a look over his 
shoulder, a look that was somehow furtive. He’d have to 
straighten that damn shepherd out. Michael went down the 
stairs and decided to go through the kitchen to see Filomena 
again and give her a final farewell. He asked the old woman, 
‘Is Dr Taza still sleeping?’ 


555 



Filomena’s wrinkled face was sly. ‘ Old roosters can’t greet 
the sun. The doctor went to Palermo last night.’ 

Michael laughed. He went out the kitchen entrance and the 
smell of lemon blossoms penetrated even his sinus-filled nose. 
He saw Apollonia wave to him from the car just ten paces up 
the villa’s driveway and then he realized she was motioning 
him to stay where he was, that she meant to drive the car to 
where he stood. Calo stood grfnning beside the car, his lupara 
dangling in his hand. But there was still no sign of Fabrizzio. 
At that moment, without any conscious reasoning process, 
everything came together in his mind, and Michael shouted 
to the girl, ‘Nol No! ’ But his shout was drowned in the roar 
of the tremendous explosion as Apollonia switched on the 
ignition. The kitchen door shattered into fragments and 
Michael was hurled along the wall of the villa for a good ten 
feet. Stones tumbling from the villa roof hit him on the 
shoulders and one glanced off his skull as he was lying on the 
ground. He was conscious just long enough to see that nothing 
remained of the Alfa Romeo but its four wheels and the steel 
shafts which held them together. 

He came to consciousness in a room that seemed very dark 
and heard voices that were so low that they were pure sound 
rather than words. Out of animal instinct he tried to pretend 
he was still unconscious but the voices stopped and someone 
was leaning from a chair close to his bed and the voice was 
distinct now, saying, ‘Well, he’s with us finaUy,’ A lamp went 
on, its light like white fire on his eyeballs and Michael turned 
his head. It felt very heavy, numb. And then he could sec the 
face over his bed was that of Dr Taza. 

‘Let me look at you a minute and I’ll put the light out,’ Dr 
Taza said gently. He was busy shining a small pencil flasl^ght 
into Michael’s eyes. ‘You’ll be all right,’ Dr Taza said and 
turned to someone else in the room. ‘You can speak to him.* 

It was Don Tommasino sitting on a chair near his bed, 
Michael could sec him clearly now. Don Tommasino was say- 
ing, ‘Michael, Michael, can I talk to you? Do you want to 
rest?’ 

It was easier to raise a hand to make a gesture and Michael 

356 



did so and Don Tonunasino said, *Did Fabriazio bring the car 
from the garage?* 

Michael, without knowing he did so, smiled. It was in some 
strange way, a chilling smile, of assent. Don Tommasino said, 
‘Fabrizzio has vanished. Listen to me, Michael. You’ve been 
unconscious for nearly a week. Do you understand? Every- 
body thinks you’re dead, so you’re safe now, they’ve stopped 
looldng for you. I’ve sent messages to your father and he’s sent 
back instructions. It won’t be long now, you’ll be back in 
America. Meanwhile you’ll rest here quietly. You’re safe up 
in the mountains, in a special frrmhouse I own. The Palermo 
people have made their peace with me now that you’re sup- 
posed to be dead, so it was you they were after all the time. 
They wanted to kill you while making people think it was me 
they were after. That's something you should know. As for 
everything else, leave it all to me. You recover your strength 
and be tranquil.’ 

Michael was remembering everything now. He knew his 
wife was dead, that Calo was dead. He thought of the old 
woman in the kitchen. He couldn’t remember if she had come 
outside with him. He whispered, ‘Filomena?’ Don Tomma- 
sino said quietly, ^She wasn’t hurt, just a bloody nose from the 
blast. Don’t worry about her.’ 

Michael said, * Fabrizzio. Let your shepherds know that the 
one who gives me Fabrizzio will own the finest pastures in 
Sicily.’ 

Both men seemed to sigh with relief. Don Tommasino lifted 
a glass from a nearby table and drank from it an amber fluid 
that jolted his head up. Dr Taza sat on the bed and said almost 
absently, ‘ You know, you’re a widower. That’s rare in Sicily. ’ 
As if the distinction might comfort him. 

Michael motioned to Don Tommasino to lean closer. The 
Don sat on the bed and bent his head. * Tell my father to get me 
home,’ Michael said. *Tcll my father I wish to be his son.’ 

But it was to be another month before Michael recovered 
from his injuries and another two months after that before all 
the necessary papers and arrangements were ready. Then he 
was flown from Palermo to Rome and from Rome to New 
York. In all that time no trace had been found of Fabrizzio. 


• 557 



Book VII 


CHAPTKR TWENTY-FIVE 

When Kay Adams received her college degree, she took a 
job teacliing grade school in her New Hampshire hometown. 
The first six months after Michael vanished she made weekly 
telephone calls to his mother asking about him. Mrs Corlconc 
was always friendly and always wound up saying, ‘You a very 
very nice girl. You forget about Mikey and find a nice hus- 
band.’ Kay was not offended at her bluntness and understood 
that the mother spoke out of concern for her as a young girl 
in an impossible situation. 

When her first school term ended, she decided to go to New 
York to buy some decent clothes and sec some old coUege girl- 
friends. She thought also about looking for some sort of in- 
teresting job in New York. She had lived like a spinster for 
almost two years, reading and teaching, refusing dates, refusing 
to go out at all, even though she had given up making calls 
to Long Beach. She knew she couldn’t keep that up, she was 
becoming irritable and unhappy. But she had always believed 
Michael would write her or send her a message of some sort. 
That he had not done so humiliated her, it saddened her that 
he was so distrustful even of her. 

She took an early train and was checked into her hotel by 
mid-<afternoon. Her girlfriends worked and she didn’t want 
to bother them at their jobs, she planned to call them at night. 
And she didn’t really feel like going shopping after the ex- 
hausting train trip. Being alone in the hotd room, remember- 
ing all the times she and Michael had used hotel rooms to 
make love, gave her a feeling of desolation. It was that more 
than anything else that gave her the idea of calling Michaers 
mother out in Long Beach. 

The phone was answered by a rough masculine voice with a 
typical, to her. New York accent. Kay asked to speak to Mrs 

55 « 



Corleone. There was a few minutes* silence and then Kay heard 
the heavily accented voice asking who it was. 

Kay was a little embarrassed now. * This is Kay Adams, Mrs 
Corleone,’ she said. *Do you remcmbei me?’ 

‘Sure, sure, I remember you,’ Mrs Corleone said. ‘How 
come you no caU up no more? You get a married?’ 

‘Oh, no,’ Kay said, ‘I’ve been busy.’ She was surprised at 
the mother obviously being annoyed that she had stopped 
calling. ‘Have you heard anything from Michael? Is he all 
right?’ 

There was silence at the other end of the phone and then 
Mrs Corleone’s voice came strong. ‘Mikey is at home. He no 
caU you up? He no see you?* 

Kay felt her stomach go weak from shock and a humiliating 
desire to weep. Her voice broke a little when she asked, ‘ How 
long has he been home?* 

Mrs Corleone said, ‘Six months.’ 

‘Oh, I see,’ Kay said. And she did. She felt hot waves of 
shame that Michael’s mother knew he was treating her so 
cheaply. And then she was angry. Angry at Michael, at his 
mother, angry at all foreigners, Italians who didn’t have the 
common courtesy to keep up a decent show of friendship even 
if a love affair was over. Didn’t Michael know she would be 
concerned for him as a friend even if he no longer wanted her 
for a bed companion, even if he no longer wanted to marry 
her? Did he think she was one of those poor benighted 
Italian girls who would commit suicide or make a scene after 
giving up her virgiruty and then being thrown over? But she 
kept her voice as cool as possible. ‘I see, thank you very 
much,’ she said. * I’m glad Michael is home again knd all right. 
I just wanted to know. I won’t call you again.’ 

Mrs Corleone’s voice came impatiently over the phone as if 
she had heard nothing that Kay had said. ‘You wanta see 
Mikey, you come out here now. Give him a nice surprise. You 
take a taxi, and I tell the man at the gate to pay the taxi for you. 
You tell the taxi man he get two times his clock, otherwise he 
no come way out the Long Beach. But don’t you pay. My 
husband’s man at the gate pay the taxi.’ 

‘1 couldn’t do that, Mrs Corleone,* Kay said coldly. *lf 

359 



Michael wanted to see me, he would have called me at home 
before this. Obviously he doesn't want to resume our rela- 
tionship.’ 

Mrs Corleone’s voice came briskly over the phone. ‘You a 
very nice girl, you gotta nice legs, but you no gotta much 
brains.' She chuckled. ‘You come out to see me, not Mikey. 
I wanta talk to you. You come right now. An’ no pay the taxi. 
I wait for you.* The phone clicked. Mrs Corlconc had hung 
up. 

Kay could have called back and said she wasn’t coming but 
she knew she had to see Michael, to talk to him, even if it was 
just polite talk. If he was home now, openly, that meant he 
was no longer in trouble, he could live normally. She jumped 
off the bed and started to get ready to see him. She took a great 
deal of care with her makeup and dress. When she was ready 
to leave she stared at her reflection in the mirror. Was she 
better-looking than when Michael had disappeared? Or would 
he find her unattractively older? Her figure had become more 
womanly, her hips rounder, her breasts fuller, Italians liked 
that supposedly, though Michael had always said he loved her 
being so thin. It didn’t matter really, Michael obviously didn’t 
want anything to do with her any more, otherwise he most 
certainly would have called in the six months he had been 
home. 

The taxi she hailed refused to take her to Long Beach until 
she gave him a pretty smile and told him she would pay double 
the meter. It was nearly an hour’s ride and the mall in Long 
Beach had changed since she last saw it. There were iron 
fences around it and an iron gate barred the mall entrance. A 
map wearing slacks and a white jacket over a red shirt opened 
the gate, poked his head into the cab to read the meter and 
gave the cab driver some bills. Then when Kay saw the driver 
was not protesting and was happy with the money paid, she 
got out and walked across the m'aU to the central house. 

Mrs Corleone herself opened the door and greeted Kay with 
a warm embrace that surprised her. Then she surveyed Kay 
with an appraising eye. ‘You a beautiful girl,* she said flatly. 
‘I have stupid sons.’ She pulled Kay inside the door and led 
her to the Idtchen, where a platter of foocf was already set out 

560 



and a pot of coffee perked on the stove. ‘Michael comes home 
pretty soon,^ she said. ‘You surprise him.* 

They sat down together and the old woman forced Kay to 
cat, meanwhile asking questions with great curiosity. She was 
delighted that Kay was a schoolteacher and that she had come 
to New York to visit old girlfriends and that Kay was oniy 
twenty -four years old. She kept nodding her head as if all the 
facts accorded wnth some private specifications in her mind. 
Kay was so nervous that she just answered the questions, 
never saying anything else. 

She saw him first through the kitchen window. A car pulled 
up in front of the house and two other men got out. Then 
Michael. He straightened up to talk with one of the other men. 
His profile, the left one, was exposed to her view. It was 
cracked, indented, like the plastic face of a doll that a child 
has wantonly kicked. In a curious way it did not mar his hand- 
someness in her eyes but moved her to tears. She saw him put 
a snow-white handkerchief to his mouth and nose and hold it 
there for a moment while he turned away to come into the 
house. 

She heard the door open and his footsteps in the hall turning 
into the kitchen and then he was in the open space, seeing her 
and his mother. He seemed impassive, and then he smiled ever 
so slightly, the broken half of his face halting the widening of 
his mouth. And Kay, who had meant just to say ‘Hello, how 
arc you,' in the coolest possible way, slipped out of her seat 
to run into his arms, bury her face against his shoulder. He 
kissed her wet cheek and held her until she finished weeping 
and then he walked her out to his car, waved hifi bodyguard 
away and drove off with her beside him, she repairing her 
makeup by simply wiping what was left of it away with her 
handkerchief. 

‘I never meant to do that,' Kay said. ‘It’s just that nobody 
told me how badly they hurt you.' 

Michael laughed and touched the broken side of his face. 
* You mean this? That’s nothing. Just gives me sinus trouble. 
Now that I'm home I'll probably get it fixed. I couldn’t write 
you or anything,' Michael said. ‘ You have to understand that 
before anything else.' 


561 



‘OK/ she said. 

‘ Tve got a place in the city/ Michael said. ' Is it all right if we 
go there or should it be dinner and drinks at a restaurant?’ 

‘Tm not hungry/ Kay said. 

They drove towards New York in silence for a while. ‘Did 
you get your degree?’ Michael asked. 

‘Yes/ Kay said. ‘I’m teaching grade school in my home- 
town now. Did they find the man who really killed the police- 
man, is that why you were able to come home?’ 

For a moment Michael didn’t answer. ‘Yes, they did,’ he 
said. ‘ It was in aU the New York papers. Didn’t you read about 
it?’ 

Kay laughed with the relief of him denying he was a mur- 
derer. ‘We only get the New York Tmes up in our town,’ she 
said. ‘I guess it was buried back in page eighty-nine. If I’d read 
it I’d have called your mother sooner.’ She paused and then 
said, ‘ It’s funny, the way your mother used to talk, I almost 
believed you had done it. And just before you came, while we 
were drinking coffee, she told me about that crazy man who 
confessed.’ 

Michael said, ‘ Maybe my mother did believe it at first.* 

‘Your own mother?’ Kay asked. 

Michael grinned. ‘Mothers are like cops. They always be- 
lieve the worst.* 

Michael parked the car in a garage on Mulberry Street where 
the owner seemed to know him. He took Kay around the 
corner to what looked like a fairly decrepit brownstone house 
which fitted into the rundown neighbourhood. Michael had a 
key to the front door and when they went inside Kay saw that 
it )vas as expensively and comfortably furnished as a million- 
aire’s town house. Michael led her to the upstairs apartment 
which consisted of an enormous living room, a huge kitchen 
and door that led to the bedroom. In one corner of the living 
room was a bar and Michael mixed them both a drink. They 
sat on a sofa together and Michael said quietly, ‘ We might as 
well go into the bedroom.* Kay took a long pull from her 
drink and smiled at him. ‘ Yes/ she said. 

For Kay the lovemaking was almost like it had been before 
except that Michael was rougher, more direct, not as tender 

562 



as he had been. As if he weie on guard against her. But she 
didn’t want to complain. It would wear ofF. In a funny way» 
men were more sensitive in a situation like this, she thought. 
She had found making love to Michael after a two-year ab- 
sence the most natural thing in the world. It was as if he had 
never been away. 

'You could have written me, you could have trusted me/ 
she said, nestling against his body. ' 1 would have practised the 
New England omerta. Yankees are pretty closemouthed too, 
you know.’ 

Michael laughed sofitly in the darkness. 'I never figured you 
to be waiting,’ he said. *I never figured you to wait after what 
happened.’ 

Kay said quickly, ‘I never believed you killed those two 
men. Except mayl^ when your mother seemed to think so. 
But I never believed it in my heart. I know you too well.’ 

She could hear Michael give a sigh. ^It doesn’t matter 
whether I did or not,’ he said. * You have to understand that.’ 

Kay was a little stuimed by the coldness in his voice. She 
said, *So just tell me now, did you or didn’t you?’ 

Michael sat up on his pillow and in the darkness a light 
flared as he got a cigarette going. * If I asked you to marry me, 
would I have to answer that question first before you’d give 
me an answer to mine?’ 

Kay said, * I don’t care, I love you, I don’t care. If you loved 
me you wouldn’t be afraid to tell me the truth. You wouldn’t 
be airraid I might tell the police. That’s it, isn’t it? You’re really 
a gangster then, isn’t that so? But I really don’t care. What I 
care about is that you obviously don’t love me. You didn’t 
even call me up when you got back home.’ 

Michael was puffing on his cigarette and some burning ashes 
fell on Kay’s bare back. She flinched a little and said jokingly, 
‘Stop torturing me, I won’t talk.’ 

Michael didn’t laugh. His voice sounded absentminded. 
‘ You know, when I came home I wasn’t that glad when I saw 
my family, my father, my mother, my sister Connie, and Tom. 
It was nice but I didn’t really give a damn. Then 1 came home 
tonight and saw you in the kitchen and I was glad. Is that what 
you mean by love?’ 


5^5 



‘ That*s dose enough for me/ Kay said. 

They made love again for a while. Michael was more tender 
this time. And then he went out to get them both a drink. 
When he came back he sat on an armchair fadng the bed* 
‘Lct\s get serious/ he said. ‘How do you feel about marrying 
me?' Kay smiled at him and motioned him into the bed. 
Michael smiled back at her. ‘Be serious/ he said. ‘I can’t tell 
you about anything that happened. I’m working for my father 
now. I’m being trained to take over the family olive oil busi- 
ness. But you know my family has enemies, my father has 
enemies. You might be a very young widow, there’s a chance, 
not much of a one, but it could happen. And I won’t be telling 
you what happened at the office every day. I won’t be telling 
you anything about my Inisiness. You’ll be my wife but you 
won’t be my partner in life, as I think they say. Not an equal 
partner. That can’t be.’ 

Kay sat up in bed. She switched on a huge lamp standing on 
the night table and then she lit a cigarette. She leaned back on 
the pillows and said quietly, ‘You’re telling me you’re a 
gangster, isn’t that it? You’re telling me that you’re respon- 
sible for people being killed and other sundry crimes related 
to murder. And that I’m not ever to ask about that part of 
your life, not even to tliink about it. Just like in the horror 
movies when the monster asks the beautiful girl to marry him.* 
Michael grinned, the cracked part of his face turned tow^ards 
her, and Kay said in contrition, ‘Oh, Mike, I don’t even notice 
that stupid thing, 1 swear I don’t.’ 

* I know,’ Michael said lauglung. ‘ I like having it now except 
that it makes the snot drip out of my nose.’ 

^ You said be serious/ Kay went on. ‘ If we get married what 
kind of a life am I supposed to lead? Like your mother, like 
an Italian housewife with just the kids and home to take care 
of? And what about if something happens? I suppose you 
could wind up in jail someday.’ 

‘No, that’s not possible,* Michael said. ‘Killed, yes; jail, 
no.’ 

Kay laughed at this confidence, it was a laugh that had a 
funny mixture of pride with its amusement. ‘But how can you 
say that?’ she said. ‘Really.’ 



Michael sighed. 'These are all the things I can’t talk to you 
about, I don’t want to talk to you about.’ 

Kay was silent for a long time. ‘Why do you want me to 
marry you after never calling me all these months? Am I so 
good in bed?’ 

Michael nodded gravely. ‘ Sure,* he said. * But I’m getting it 
for nothing so why should I marry you for that? Look, I don’t 
want an answer now. We’re going to keep seeing each other. 
You can talk it over with your parents. I hear your father is a 
real tough guy in his own way. Listen to his advice.’ 

‘You haven’t answered why, why you want to marry me,’ 
Kay said. 

Michael took a white handkerchief from the drawer of the 
night table and held it to his nose. He blew into it and then 
wiped. ‘There’s the best reason for not marrying me,’ he said. 
‘How would that be having a guy around who always has to 
blow his nose?’ 

Kay said impatiently, ‘Come on, be serious, I asked you a 
question.’ 

Michael held the handkerchief in his hand. ‘OK,’ he said, 
* this one time. You are the only person I felt any affection for, 
that I care about, I didn’t call you because it never occurred 
to me that you’d still be interested in me after everything that’s 
happened. Sure, I could have chased you, I could have conned 
you, but I. didn’t want to do that. Now here’s something I’ll 
trust you with and I don’t want you to repeat it even to your 
father. If everything goes right, the Corleone Family will be 
completely legitimate in about five years. Some very tricky 
things have to be done to make that possible. That’s when you 
may become a wealthy widow. Now what do I want you for? 
Well, because I want you and I want a family. I want kids; it’s 
time. And I don’t want those k*ds to be influenced by me the 
way I was influenced by my rather. I don’t mean my fathet 
deliberately influenced me. He never did. He never even 
wanted me in the family business. He wanted me to become a 
professor or a doctor, something like that. But things went 
bad and I had to fight for my Family. I had to fight because 1 
love and admire my father. J never knew a man more worthy 
of respect. He was a good husband and a good father and a 



good friend to people who were not so fortunate in life. There^s 
another side to him, but that’s not relevant to me as his son. 
Anyway I don’t want that to happen to my kids. I want them 
to be influenced by you. I want them to grow up to be All- 
American kids, real All-American, the whole works. Maybe 
they or their grandchildren will go into politics.’ Michael 
grinned. ‘Maybe one of them will be President of the United 
States. Why the heU not? In my history course at Dartmouth 
we did some background on all the Presidents and they had 
fathers and grandfathers who were lucky they didn’t get 
hanged. But I’ll settle for my kids being doctors or musicians 
or teachers. They’ll never be in the Family business. By the 
time they arc that old I’ll be retired anyway. And you and I will 
be part of some country club crowd, the good simple life of 
well-to-do Americans. How does that strike you for a pro- 
position?’ 

‘Marvellous,’ Kay said. ‘But you sort of skipped over the 
widow part.’ 

‘There’s not much chance of that. T just mentioned it to give 
a fair presentation.* Michael patted his nose with the handker- 
chief. 

‘ I can’t beUeve it, I can’t believe you’re a man like that, you’re 
just not,’ Kay said. Her face had a bewildered look. ‘I just 
don’t understand the whole thing, how it could possibly be.’ 

‘Well, I’m not giving any more explanations,’ Michael said 
gently. ‘You know, you don’t have to think about any of this 
stuff, it has nothing to do with you really, or with out life 
together if we get married.’ 

Kay shook her head. ‘ How can you want to marry me, how 
can you hint that you love me, you never say the word but you 
ju^t now said you loved your father, you never said you loved 
me, how could you if you distrust me so much you can’t tell 
me about the most important things in your life ? How can you 
want to have a wife you can’t trust? Your father trusts your 
mother. I know that.’ 

‘Sure,’ Michael said. ‘But that doesn’t mean he teUs her 
everything. And, you know, he has reason to trust her. Not 
because they got married and she’s his wife. But she bore him 
four children in times when it was not that safe to bear chil- 

366 



dren. She nursed and guarded him when people shot him. She 
believed in him. He was always her first loyalty for forty years. 
After you do that maybe Fll tell you a few things you really 
don’t want to hear.’ 

‘Will we have to live in the mall?* Kay asked. 

Michael nodded. ‘We’ll have our own house, it won’t be so 
bad. My parents don’t meddle. Our lives will be our own. But 
until everything gets straightened out, I have to live in the 
mall.’ 

‘ Because it’s dangerous for you to live outside it,’ Kay said. 

For the first time since she had come to know him, she saw 
Michael angry. It was cold chilling anger that was not ex- 
ternalised in any gesture or change in voice. It was a coldness 
that came off him like death and Kay knew that it was this 
coldness that would make her decide not to marry him if she 
so decided. 

‘ The trouble is all that damn trash in the movies and’ the 
newspapers,’ Michael said. ‘You’ve got the wrong idea of my 
father and the Corleone Family. I’ll make a final explanation 
and this one will be reaUy final. My father is a businessman 
trying to provide for his wife and children and those friends 
he might need someday in a time of trouble. He doesn’t accept 
the rules of the society we live in because those rules would 
have condemned him to a life not suitable to a man like him- 
self, a man of extraordinary force and character. What you 
have to understand is that he considers himself the equal of aU 
those great men like Presidents and Prime Ministers and 
Supreme Court Justices and Governors of the States. He 
refuses to accept their will over his own. He refuses to live by 
rules set up by others, rules which condemn him to a 
defeated life. But his ultimate aim is to enter that society with 
a certain power since society doesn’t really protect its members 
who do not have their own individual power. In the meantime 
he operates on a code of ethics he considers far superior to the 
legal structures of society.’ 

Kay was looking at him incredulously. ‘But that’s ridicu- 
lous,’ she said. ‘What if everybody felt the same way? How 
could society ever function, we’d be back in the times of the 
cavemen. Mike, you don’t believe what you’re saying, do you ? ’ 

367 



Michael grinned at her. 'I’m just telling you what my father 
believes. I just want you to understand that whatever else he 
is, he’s not irresponsible, or at least not in the society which he 
has created. He’s not a crazy machine-gunning mobster as you 
seem to think. He’s a responsible man in his own way.’ 

‘And what do you believe?’ Kay asked quietly. 

Michael shrugged. ‘I believe in my family,’ he said. ‘I be- 
lieve in you and the family we may have. I don’t trust society 
to protect us, 1 have no intention of placing my fate in the 
hands of men whose only qualihcation is that they managed 
to con a block of people to vote for them. But that’s for now. 
My father’s time is done. The things he did can no longer be 
done except with a great deal of risk. Whether we like it or 
not the Corleone Family has to join that society. But when 
they do I’d like us to join it with plenty of our own power ; 
that is, money and own.-rship of other valuables. I’d like to 
make my children as secure as possible before they join that 
general destiny.’ 

‘But you volunteered to fight for your country, you were a 
war hero,* Kay said. ‘What happened to make you change?’ 

Michael said, ‘ This is really getting us no place. But maybe 
Tm just one of those real old-fashioned conservatives they 
grow up in your hometown. I take care of myself. Individual. 
Governments really don’t do much for their people, that’s what 
it comes down to, but that’s not it really. All I can say, T have 
to help my father, I have to be on his side. And you have to 
make your decision about being on my side.’ He smiled at her. 
‘ I guess getting married was a bad idea.’ 

Kay patted the bed. ‘ I don’t know about marrying, but I’ve 
gone without a man for two years and I’m not letting you off 
so easy now. Come on in here.’ 

When they were in bed together, the light out, she whis- 
pered to him, ‘Do you believe me about not having a man 
since you left?’ 

‘ I believe you,’ Michael said. 

‘Did you?’ she whispered in a softer voice. 

‘Yes,’ Michael said. He felt her stiffen a little. ‘But not in 
the last six months.’ It was true. Kay was the first woman he 
had made love to since the death of ApoUonia. 

568 



CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX 


The garish suite overlooked the fake fairyland grounds in 
the rear of the hotel ; transplanted palm trees lit up by climbers 
of orange lights, two huge swimming pools shimmering dark 
blue by the light of the desert stars. On the horizon were the 
sand and stone mountains that ringed Las Vegas nestling in its 
neon valley. Johnny Fontane let the heavy, richly embroidered 
grey drape fall and turned back to the room. 

A special detail of four men, a pit boss, a dealer, extra relief 
man, and a cocktail waitress in her scanty nightclub costume 
were getting things ready for private action. Nino Valenti was 
lying on the sofa in the living room part of the suite, a water 
glass of whisky in his hand. He watched the people from the 
casino setting up the blackjack table with the proper six 
padded chairs around its horseshoe outer rim. "That*s great, 
that’s great/ he said in a slurred voice that was not quite 
drunken. ‘Johnny, come on and gamble with me against these 
bastards. I got the luck. We’ll beat their crullers in.* 

Johnny sat on a footstool opposite the couch. ‘You know I 
don't gamble/ he said. ‘How you feeling, Nino?* 

Nino Valenti grinned at him. ‘Great. I got broads coming 
up at midnight, then some supper, then back to the blackjack 
table. You know 1 got the house beat for almost fifty grand 
and they’ve been grinding me for a week?' 

‘Yeah,’ Johnny Fontane said. ‘Who do you want to leave it 
to when you croak?’ 

Nino drained his glass empty. ‘Johnny, where the hell did 
you get your rep as a swinger? You’re a deadhead, Johnny. 
Christ, the tourists in this town have more fun than you do.’ 

Johnny said, ‘ Yeah. You want a lift to that blackjack table?’ 

Nino struggled erect on the sofa and planted his feet firmly 
on the rug. ‘1 can make it,’ he said. He let the glass slip to the 
floor and got up and walked quite steadily to where the black- 
jack table had l^en set up. The dealer was ready. The pit boss 
stood behind the dealer watching. The relief dealer sat on a 

569 



chair away from the table. The cocktail waitress sat on another 
chair in a line of vision so that she could sec any of Nino 
Valenti’s gestures. 

Nino rapped on the green baize with his knuckles. ‘Chips/ 
he said. 

The pit boss took a pad from his pocket and filled out a slip 
and put it in front of NinO with a small fountain pen. ‘ Here 
you arc, Mr Valenti,* he said. ‘The usual five thousand to start.* 
Nino scrawled his signature on the bottom of the slip and the 
pit boss put it in his pocket. He nodded to the dealer. 

The dealer with incredibly deft fingers took stacks of black 
and gold one-hundred-doUars chips from the built-in racks 
before him. In not more than five seconds Nino had five even 
stacks of onc-hundrcd-dollar chips before him, each stack had 
ten chips. 

There were six squares a little larget than playing card shapes 
etched in white on the green baize, each square placed to cor- 
respond to where a player would sit. Now Nino was placing 
bets on three of these squares, single chips^ and so playing 
three hands each for a hundred dollars. He refused to take a 
hit on all three hands because the dealer had a six up, a bust 
card, and the dealer did bust. Nino raked in his chips and 
turned to Johnny Fontanc. ‘ That’s how to start the night, huh, 
Johnny?* 

Johnny smiled. It was unusual for a gambler like Nino to 
have to sign a chit while gambling. A word was usually good 
enough for the high rollers. Maybe they were afraid Nino 
wouldn’t remember his take-out because of his drinking. They 
didn’t know that Nino remembered everything. 

Nino kept winning and after the third round lifted a finger 
at t(ie cocktail waitress. She went to the bar at the end of the 
room and brought him his usual rye in a water glass. Nino 
took the drink, switched it to his other hand so he could put 
an arm around the waitress. ‘ Sit with me, honey, play a few 
hands ; bring me luck.’ 

The cocktail waitress was a very beautiful girl, but Johnny 
could see she was all cold hustle, no real personality, though 
she worked at it. She was giving Nino a big smile but her 
tongue was hanging out for one of those black and gold chips. 


570 



What the hell, Johnny thought, why shouldn’t she get some of 
it? He just regretted that Nino wasn’t getting something better 
for his money. 

Nino let the waitress play his hands for a few rounds and 
then gave her one of the chips and a pat on the behind to send 
her away from the table. Johnny motioned to her to bring him 
a drink. She did so but she did it as if she were playing the 
most dramatic moment in the most dramatic movie ever made. 
She turned all her charm on the great Johnny Fontane. She 
made her eyes sparkle with invitation, her walk was the sexiest 
walk ever walked, her mouth was very slightly parted as if 
she were ready to bite the nearest object of her obvious passion. 
She resembled nothing so much as a female animal in heat, but 
it was a deliberate act. Johnny Fontane thought, oh, Christ, 
one of them. It was the most popular approach of women who 
wanted to take him to bed. It only worked when he was very 
drunk and he wasn’t drunk now. He gave the girl one of his 
famous grins and said, ‘Thank you, honey.* The girl looked at 
him and parted her lips in a thank-you smile, her eyes went all 
smoky, her body tensed with the torso leaning slightly back 
from the long tapering legs in their mesh stockings. An enor- 
mous tension seemed to be building up in her body, her breasts 
seemed to grow fuller and swell burstingly against her thin 
scantily cut blouse. Then her whole body gave a slight quiver 
that almost let off a sexual twang. The whole impression was 
one of a woman having an orgasm simply because Johnny 
Fontane had smiled at her and said, ‘ Thank you, honey.’ It was 
very well done. It was done better than Johimy had ever seen 
it done before. But by now he knew it was fake. And the odds 
were always good that the broads who did it were a lousy lay. 

He watched her go back to her chair and nursed his drink 
slowly. He didn’t want to see that little trick again. He wasn’t 
in the mood for it tonight. 

It was an hour before Nino Valenti began to go. He started 
leaning first, wavered back, and then plunged oil the chair 
straight to the floor. But the pit boss and the relief dealer had 
been alerted by the first weave and caught him before he hit 
the ground. They lifted him and carried him through the parted 
drapes that led to the bedroom of the suite. 



Johnny kept watching as the cocktail waitress helped the 
other two men undress Nino and shove him under the bed 
covers. The pit boss was counting Nino*s chips and making a 
note on his pad of chits, then guarding the table with its 
dealer’s chips. Johnny said to him, ‘How long has that been 
going on?* 

The pit boss shrugged. ‘He went early tonight. The first 
time we got the house doc and he fixed Mr Valenti up with 
something and gave him some sort of a lecture. Then Nino 
told us that we shouldn’t caU the doc when that happened, just 
put him to bed and he’d be OK in the morning. So that’s what 
we do. He’s pretty lucky, he was a winner again tonight, almost 
three grand.* 

Johimy Fontane said, ‘WcD, let’s get the house doc up here 
tonight, OK? Page the casino floor if you have to.* 

It was almost fifteen minutes before Jules Segal came into 
the suite. Johnny noted with irritation that this guy never 
looked like a doctor. Tonight he was wearing a blue loose- 
knit polo shirt with white trim, some sort of white suede shoes, 
and no socks. He looked futmy as hell carrying the traditional 
black doctor’s bag. 

Johnny said, ‘You oughta figure out a way to carry your 
stuff in a cut -down coif bag.’ 

Jules grinned unaerslanamgly, ‘Yeah, this medical school 
carry-all is a real drag. Scares the hell out of people. They 
should change the colour anyway.’ 

He went over to where Nino was lying in bed. As he opened 
his bag he said to'Johnny, ‘Thanks for that cheque you sent me 
as a consultant. It was excessive. 1 didn’t do that much.’ 

‘Like hell you didn’t,’ Johnny said. ‘Anyway, forget that, 
that was a long time ago. What’s with Nino?’ 

Jules was making a quick examination of heartbeat, pulse, 
and blood pressure. He took a needle out of his bag and shoved 
it casually into Nino’s arm and pressed the plunger. Nino’s sleep- 
ing face lost its waxy paleness, colour came into the cheeks, 
as if the blood had started pumping faster. 

‘Very simple diagnosis,’ Jxiles said briskly. ‘I had a chance 
to examine him and run some tests when he first came here 
and fainted. T had him moved to the hospital before he re- 


57 * 



gained consciousness. He’s got diabetes, mild adult stabile, 
which is no problem if you take care of it with medication and 
diet and so forth. He insists on ignoring it. Also he is firmly 
determined to drink himself to death. His liver is going and his 
brain will go. Right now he’s in a mild diabetic coma. My 
advice is to have him put away.* 

Johnny felt a sense of relief. It couldn’t be too serious, all 
Nino had to do was take care df himself. ‘You mean in one of 
those joints where they dry you out?* Johnny asked. 

Jules went over to the bar in the far corner of the room and 
made himself a drink. ‘No,* he said. ‘I mean committed. You 
know, the crazy house.* 

‘Don’t be funny,* Johnny said. 

‘ I’m not joking,* Jules said. ‘ I’m not up on all the psychiatric 
jazz but I know something about it, part of my trade. Your 
friend Nino can be put back into fairly good shape unless 
the liver damage has gone too far, which we can’t know until 
an autopsy really. But the real disease is in his head. In essence 
he doesn’t care if he dies, maybe he even wants to kill himself. 
Until that is cured there’s no hope for him. That’s why 1 say, 
have him committed and then he can undergo the necessary 
psychiatric treatment.’ 

There was a knock on the door and Johnny went to answer 
it. It was Lucy Mancini. She came into Johnny’s arms and 
kissed him. ‘Oh, Johnny, it’s so good to see you,* she said. 

‘It’s been a long time,’ Johnny Fontane said. He noticed 
that Lucy had changed. She had got much slimmer, her 
clothes were a hell of a lot better and she wore them better. 
Her hair style fitted her face in a sort of boyish cut. She looked 
younger and better than he had ever seen her and the thought 
crossed his mind that she could keep him company here in 
Vegas. It woiild be a pleasure hanging out with a real broad. 
But before he could turn on the charm he remembered she was 
the doc’s girl. So it was out. He made his smile just friendly 
and said, * What are you doing coming to Nino’s apartment at 
night, eh?* 

She punched him in the shoulder. ‘1 heard Nino was sick 
and that Jules came up. I just wanted to see if I could help. 
Nino’s OK, isn’t he?* 


373 



‘Sure/ Johnny said. * He'll be fine.' 

Jules Segal had sprawled out on the couch. 'Like hell he is/ 
Jules said. *I suggest we all sit here and wait for Nino to come 
to. And then we all talk him into committing himself. Lucy, 
he likes you, maybe you can help. Johnny, if you're a real 
friend of his you'll go along. Otherwise old Nino's liver will 
shortly be exhibit A in some university medical lab.’ 

Johnny was offended by the doctor’s flippant attitude. Who 
the heU did he think he was? He started to say so but Nino's 
voice came from the bed, ‘ Hey, old buddy, how about a drink ? ’ 

Nino was sitting up in bed. He grinned at Lucy and said, 
‘ Hey, baby, come to old Nino.' He held his arms wide open. 
Lucy sat on the edge of the bed and gave him a hug. Oddly 
enough Nino didn’t look bad at all now, almost normal. 

Nino snapped his fingers. ‘Come on, Johnny, gimmec a 
drink. The night's young yet. Where the hell's my blackjack 
table?’ 

Jules took a long slug from his own glass and said to Nino, 
‘You can't have a drink. Your doctor forbids it.' 

Nino scowled. ‘ Screw my doctor.' Then a play-acting look 
of contrition came on his face, ‘Hey, Julie, that’s you. You're 
my doctor, right? 1 don't mean you, old buddy. Johnny, get 
me a drink or I get up out of bed and get it myself.' 

Johnny shrugged and moved towards the bar. Jules said 
in^fferently, ‘I’m saying he shouldn’t have it.’ 

Johnny knew why Jules irritated him. The doctor's voice 
was always cool, the words never stressed no matter how dire, 
the voice always low and controlled. If he gave a warning the 
warning was in the words alone, the voice itself was neutral, 
as if uncaring. It was this that made Johnny sore enough to 
bring Nino his water glass of whisky. Before he handed it over 
he said to Jules, ‘This won’t kill him, right?' 

‘No, it won't kill him,' Jules said calmly. Lucy gave him an 
anxious glance, started to say something, then kept still. Mean- 
while Nino had taken the whisky and poured it down his 
throat, 

Johnny was smiling down at Nino; they had shown the 
punk doctor.* Suddenly Nino gasped, his face seemed to turn 
blue, he couldn't catch his breath and was choking for air. 


374 



His body leaped upwards like a fish, his face was gorged with 
blood, his eyes bulging. Jules appeared on the other side of 
the bed facing Johnny and Lucy. He took Nino by the neck 
and held him still and plunged the needle into the shoulder 
near where it joined the neck. Nino went limp in his hands, 
the heaves of his body subsided, and after a moment he 
slumped down back on to his piUow. His eyes closed in sleep. 

Johnny, Lucy, and Jules went back into the living room part 
of the suite and sat around the huge solid coffee table. Lucy 
picked up one of the aquamarine phones and ordered coffee 
and some food to be sent up. Johnny had gone over to the bar 
and mixed himself a drink. 

‘Did you know he would have that reaction from the 
whisky?* Johnny asked. 

Jules shrugged. ‘I was pretty sure he would.’ 

Johnny said sharply, ‘Then why didn’t you warn me?* 

‘I warned you,’ Jules said. 

‘You didn’t warn me right,’ Johnny said with cold anger. 
‘You arc really one hell of a doctor. You don’t give a shit. 
You tell me to get Nino in a cra2y house, you don’t bother 
to use a nice word like sanatorium. You reaUy like to stick it 
to people, right?’ 

Lucy was staring down in her lap. Jules kept smiling at 
Fontane, ‘Nothing was going to stop you from giving Nino 
that drink. You had to show you didn’t have to accept my 
warnings, my orders. Remember when you offered me a job 
as your personal physician after that throat business? I turned 
you down because I knew we could never get along. A doctor 
thinks he’s God, he’s the high priest in modern society, that’s 
one of his rewards. But you would never treat n!^e that way. 
I’d be a flunky God to you. Like those doctors you guys have 
in Hollywood. Where do you get those people from anyway? 
Christ, don’t they know anything or don’t they just care? They 
must know what’s happening to Nino but they just give him 
all kinds of drugs to keep him going. They wear those sDk 
suits and they kiss your ass because you’re a power movie 
man and so you think they are great doctors. Show bia, docs, 
you gotta have heart? Right? But they don’t give a fuck if you 
live or die. Well, my little hobby, u^orgivable as it is, is to 


575 



keep people alive. I let you give Nino that drink to show you 
what could happen to him.* Jules leaned towards Johnny Fon- 
tane, his voice still calm, unemotional. ‘Your friend is dmost 
terminal. Do you understand that? He hasn’t got a chance 
without therapy and strict medical care. His blood pressure 
and diabetes and bad habits can cause a cerebral haemorrhage 
in this very next instant. His brain will blow itself apart. Is 
that vivid enough for you ? Sure, I said crazy house. 1 want you 
to understand what’s needed. Or you won’t make a move. I’ll 
put it to you straight. You can save your buddy’s life by having 
him committed. Otherwise kiss him goodbye.’ 

Lucy murmured, ‘Jules, darling, Jules, don’t be so tough. 
Just tell him.’ 

Jules stood up. His usual cool was gone, Johnny Fon- 
tane noticed with satisfaction. His voice too had lost its quiet 
unaccented monotone. 

* Do you think this is the first time I’ve had to talk to people 
like you in a situation like this?’ Jules said. ‘I did it every day. 
Lucy says don’t be so tough, but she doesn’t know what she’s 
talking about. You know, I used to tell people, “Don’t eat so 
much or you’ll die, don’t smoke so much or you’ll die, don’t 
work so much or you’ll die, don’t drink so much or you’ll 
die.” Nobody listens. You know why? Because I don’t say, 
“You will die tomorrow. ” Well, I can tell you that Nino may 
very well die tomorrow.’ 

Jules went over to the bar and mixed himself another drink. 
‘How about it, Johnny, are you going to get Nino com- 
mitted?’ 

Johnny said, ‘I don’t know.* 

Jnles took a quick drink at the bar and filled his glass again. 
‘You know, it’s a funny thing, you can smoke yourself to 
death, drink yourself to death, work yourself to death, and even 
eat yourself to death. But that’s all acceptable. The only thing 
you can’t do medically is screw yourself to death and yet that’s 
where they put all the obstacles.* He paused to finish his drink. 
‘But even that’s trouble, for women anyway. T used to have 
women who weren’t supposed to have any more babies. “It’s 
dangerous,” I’d tell them. “You could die,” I’d tell them. 
And a month later they pop in, their faces all rosy, and say, 

576 



** Doctor, I think Tm pregnant/’ and sure enough they’d kill 
the rabbit. “But it*s dangerous*' I’d tell them. My voice used to 
have expression in those days. And they'd smile at me and 
say, “But my husband and I are very strict Catholic,” they'd 
say.’ 

There was a knock on the door and two waiters wheeled in 
a cart covered with food and silver service coffeepots. They 
took a portable table from the bottom of the cart and set it up. 
Then Johnny dismissed them. 

They sat at the table and ate the hot sandwiches Lucy had 
ordered and drank the coffee. Johnny leaned back and lit up a 
cigarette. ‘So you save lives. How come you became an 
abortionist?’ 

Lucy spoke up for the first time. ‘He wanted to help girls in 
trouble, girls who might commit suicide or do something 
dangerous to get rid of the baby.’ 

Jules smiled at her and sighed. ‘It’s not that simple. I be- 
came a surgeon finally. I’ve the good hands, as ballplayers 
say. But I was so good I scared myself silly. I’d open up some 
poor bastard’s belly and know he was going to die. I’d operate 
and know that the cancer or tumour would come back but I’d 
send them off home with a smile and a lot of bullshit. Some 
poor broad comes in and I slice off one tit. A year later she’s 
back and 1 slice o£f the other tit. A year after that, I scoop out 
her insides like you scoop the seeds out of a cantaloupe. After 
all that she dies anyway. Meanwhile husbands keep calling up 
and asking, “What do the tests show? What do the tests 
show?” 

‘ So I hired an extra secretary to take all those cal(s. I saw the 
patient only when she was fully prepared for examination, 
tests, or operation. I spent the minimum possible time with the 
victim because I was, after all, a busy man. And then finally 
I’d let the husband talk to me for two minutes. “ It’s terminal,” 
I’d say. And they could never hear that last word. They under- 
stood what it meant but they never heard it. I thought at first 
that unconsciously I was dropping my voice on the last word, 
so I consciously said it loud^. But still they never heard it. 
One guy even said, “What the hell do you mean, it’s ger- 
minal?” ’ Jules started to laugh. ‘Germinal, terminal, what the 


577 



hell. I started to do abortions. Nice and easy, everybody happy, 
like washing the dishes and leaving a clean sink. That was my 
class. I loved it, I loved being an abortionist. I don’t believe 
that a two-month foetus is a human being so no problems 
there. I was helping young girls and married women who were 
in trouble, I was making good money. I was out of the front 
lines. When I got caught I felt like a deserter that has been 
hauled in. But I was lucky, a friend pulled some strings and got 
me off but now the big hospitals won’t let me operate. So here 
I am. Giving good advice again which is being ignored just 
like in the old days.* 

‘I’m not ignoring it,’ Johnny Fontane said. ‘I’m thinking it 
over.’ 

Lucy ffnally changed the subject. ‘What are you doing in 
Vegas, Johnny? Relaxing from your duties as big-time Holly- 
wood wheel or working?’ 

Johimy shook his head. ‘Mike Cor leone wants to see me and 
have a talk. He’s flying in tonight with Tom Hagen. Tom said 
they’U be seeing you, Lucy. You know what it’s aU about?’ 

Lucy shook her head. ‘We’re all having dinner together 
tomorrow night. Freddie too. I think it might have something 
to do with the hotel. The casino has been dropping money 
lately, which shouldn’t be. The Don might want Mike to 
check it out,’ 

‘I hear Mike flnaUy got his face fixed,’ Johnny said. 

Lucy laughed. ‘ 1 guess Kay talked him into it. He wouldn’t 
do it when they were married. I wonder why? It looked so 
awful and made his nose drip. He should have had it done 
sooner.’ She paused for a moment. ‘Jules was called in by the 
C 9 rleone Family for that operation. They used him as a con- 
sultant and an observer,’ 

Johnny nodded and said dryly, ‘I recommended him for it. 

‘ Oh,’ Lucy said. ‘Anyway, ^ke said he wanted to do some- 
thing for Jules. That’s why he’s having us to dinner tomorrow 
night.’ 

Jules said musingly, ‘He didn’t trust anybody. He warned 
me to keep track of what everybody did. It was foirly straight, 
ordinary surgery. Any competent man could do it.’ 

There was a sound from the bedroom of the suite and they 

578 



looked towards the drapes. Nino had become conscious again. 
Johnny went and sat on the bed. Jules and Lucy went over to 
the foot of the bed. Nino gave them a wan grin. ‘OK, Fll 
stop being a wise guy. I feel really lousy. Johnny, remember 
about a year ago, what happened when we were with those 
two broads down in Palm Springs? I swear to you I wasn’t 
jealous about what happened. 1 was glad. You believe me, 
Johnny?* 

Johnny said reassuringly, 'Sure, Nino, I believe you.* 

Lucy and Jules looked at each other. From everything they 
had heard and kr.ew about Johnny Fontane it seemed impos- 
sible that he would take a girl away from a close friend like 
^lino. And why was Nino saying he wasn’t jealous a year 
after it happened? The same thought crossed both their 
minds, that Nino was drinking himself to death romanticaUy 
because a girl had left him to go with Johnny Fontane. 

Jules checked Nino again. ‘I’ll get a nurse to be in the room 
with you todight,’ Jules said. ‘You reaUy have to stay in bed 
for a couple of days. No kidding.* 

Nino smiled. ‘OK, Doc, just don’t make the nurse too 
pretty.’ 

Jules made a call for the nurse and then he and Lucy left. 
Johnny sat in a chair near the bed to wait for the nurse. Nino 
was falling asleep again, an exhausted look on his face. Johnny 
thought about what he had said, about not being jealous about 
what had happened over a year ago with those two broads 
down in Palm Springs. The thought had never entered his 
head that Nino might be jealous. 

A year ago Johnny Fontane had sat in his plush office, the 
office of the movie company he headed, and felt as lousy as he 
had ever felt in his life. Which was surprising because the first 
movie he had produced, widi himself as star and Nino in a 
featured part, was making tons of money. Everything had 
worked. Everybody had done their job. The picture was 
brought in under budget. Everybody was going to make a 
fortune out of it and Jack Woltz was losing ten years of his 
life. Now Johnny had two more pictures in production, one 
starring himself, one starring Nino. Nino was great on the 


579 



screen as one of those channing> dopey lover-boys that 
women loved to shove between their tits. Little boy lost. 
Everything he touched made money, it was rolling in. The 
Godfather was getting his. percentage through the bank, and 
that made Johnny feel really good. He had justihcd his God- 
father’s faith. But today that wasn’t helping much. 

And now that he was a successful independent movie pro- 
ducer he had as much power, maybe more, than he had ever 
had as a singer. Beautiful broads feU all over him just like 
before, though for a more commercial reason. He had his own 
plane, he lived more lavishly even, with the special tax benefits 
a businessman had that artists didn’t get. Then what the hell 
was bothering him? 

He knew what it was. The front of his head hurt, his nasal 
passages hurt, his throat itched. The only way he could scratch 
and relieve that itch was by singing and he was afraid to even 
try. He had called Jules Segal about it, when it would be safe 
to try to sing and Jules had said any time he felt like it. So he’d 
tried and sounded so hoarse and lousy he’d given up. And his 
throat would hurt like hell the next day, hurt in a different 
way than before the warts had been taken off. Hurt worse, 
burning. He was afraid to keep singing, afraid that he’d lose 
his voice for ever, or ruin it. 

And if he couldn’t sing, what the hell was the use of every- 
thing else? Ever3rthing else was just bullshit. Singing was the 
only thing he really knew. Maybe he knew more about singing 
and his kind of music than anybody else in the world. He was 
that good, he realixed now. All those years had made him a 
real pro. Nobody could tell him the right and the wrong, he 
didn’t have to ask anybody. He kncw.^What a waste, what a 
damn waste. 

It was a Friday and he decided to spend the weekend with 
Virginia and the kids. He called her up as he always did to 
tell her he was coming. ReaUy to give her a chance to say no. 
She never said no. Not in all fhe years they had been divorced. 
Because she would never say no to a meeting of her daughters 
and their father. What a broad, Johnny thought. He’d been 
lucky with Virginia. And though he knew he cared more about 
her than any other woman he knew it was impossible for them 

580 



to live together sexually. Maybe when they were sixty-five, like 
when you retire, they’d retire together, retire from everyt^g. 

But reality shattered these thoughts when he arrived there 
and found Virginia was feeling a little grouchy herself and the 
two girls not that crazy to sec him because they had been 
promised a weekend visit with some girlfriends on a California 
ranch where they could ride horses. 

He told Virginia to send the girls off to the ranch and kissed 
them goodbye with an amused smile. He understood them so 
well. What kid wouldn’t rather go riding horses on a ranch 
than hang around with a grouchy father who picked his own 
spots as a father. He said to Virginia, H’U have a few drinks 
and then shove off too.’ 

‘All right,* she said. She was having one of her bad days, rare, 
but recognizable. It wasn’t too easy for her leading this kind 
of life. 

She saw him taking an extra large drink. ‘What are you 
cheering yourself up for?’ Virginia asked. ‘Everything is 
going so beautifully for you. I never dreamed you had it in 
you to be such a good businessman.’ 

Johnny smiled at her. ‘ It’s not so hard,’ he said. At the same 
time he was thinking, so that’s what was wrong. He under- 
stood women and he understood now that Virginia was down 
because she thought he was having everything his own way. 
Women really hated seeing their men doing too well. It 
irritated them. It made them less sure of the hold they exerted 
over them through affection, sexual custom or marriage ties. 
So more to cheer her up than voice his own complaints, 
Johnny said, ‘What the hell difference does it make if 1 can’t 
sing.’ 

Virginia’s voice was annoyed. ‘ Oh, Johnny, you’re not a kid 
any more. You’re over thirty-five. Why do you keep worrying 
about that silly singing stuff? You make more money as a pro- 
ducer anyhow.* 

Johnny looked at her curiously and said, ‘I’m a singer. 1 
love to sing. What’s being old got to do with that?’ 

Virginia was impatient. ‘1 never liked your singing anyway. 
Now that you’ve shown you can make movies, I’m glad you 
can’t sing any more.’ 



They were both surprised when Johnny said with fury, 
‘That’s a fucking lousy thing to say.’ He was shaken. How 
could Virginia feel like that, how could she dislike him so 
much? 

Virginia smiled at his being hurt and because it was so 
outrageous that he should be angry at her she said, ‘How do 
you think I felt when all those girls came running after you 
because of the way you sang? How would you feel if I went 
ass-naked down the street to get men running after me? That’s 
what your singing was and I used to wish you’d lose your voice 
and could never sing again. But that was before we got 
divorced.’ 

Johnny hnished his drink. ‘You don’t understand a thing. 
Not a damn thing.’ He went into the kitchen and dialled 
Nino’s number. He quickly arranged for them both to go 
down to Palm Springs for the weekend and gave Nino the 
number of a girl to call, a real fresh young beauty he’d been 
meaning to get around to. ‘She’ll have a friend for you,’ 
Johnny said. *1*11 be at your place in an hour.’ 

Virginia gave him a cool goodbye when he left. He didn’t 
give a damn, it was one of the few times he was angry with 
her. The hell with it, he’d just tear loose for the weekend and 
get all the poison out of his system. 

Sure enough, everything was fine down in Palm Springs. 
Johnny used his own house down there, it was always kept 
open and staffed this time of year. The two girls were young 
enough to be great fun and not too rapacious for some kind 
of favour. Some people came over to keep them company at 
the pool until suppertime. Nino went to his room with his 
girl to get ready for supper and a quick bang while he was still 
w^rm ftom the sun. Johnny wasn’t in the mood, so he sent 
his girl, a short bandbox blonde named Tina, up to shower 
by herself. He never could make love to another woman after 
he’d had a fight with Virginia. 

He went into the glass-walled patio living room that held a 
piano. When singing with the band he had fooled around with 
the piano just for laughs, so he could pick out a song in a fake 
moonlight-soft ballad style. He sat down now and hummed 
along a bit with the piano, very softly, muttering a few words 

382 



but not really singing. Before he knew it Tina was in the living 
room making him a drink and sitting beside him at the piano. 
He played a few tunes and she hummed with him. He left her 
at the piano and went up to take his shower. In the shower he 
sang short phrases, more like speaking. He got dressed and 
went back down. Tina was still alone; Nino was really working 
his girl over or getting drunk. 

Johnny sat down at the piano again while Tina wandered off 
outside to- watch the pool. He started singing one of his old 
songs. There was no burning in his throat. The tones were 
coming out muted but with proper body. He looked at the 
patio. Tina was still out there, the glass door was closed, she 
wouldn't hear him. For some reason he didn’t want anybody 
to hear him. He started off fresh on an old ballad that was his 
favourite. He sang full out as if he were singing in public, 
letting himself go, waiting for the familiar burning rasp in his 
throat but there was none. He listened to his voice, it .was 
different somehow, but he liked it. It was darker, it was a 
man’s voice, not a kid’s, rich he thought, dark rich. He 
finished the song easing up and sat there at the piano thinking 
about it. 

Behind him Nino said, ‘Not bad, old buddy, not bad at all.’ 

Johnny swivelled his body around. Nino was standing in 
the doorway, alone. His girl wasn’t with him. Johnny was 
relieved. He didn’t mind Nino hearing him. 

‘Yeah,’ Johnny said. ‘Let’s get rid of those two broads. 
Send them home.’ 

Nino said, ‘You send them home. They’re nice kids. I’m 
not gonna hurt their feelings. Besides I just banged mine 
twice. How would it look if I sent her away without even 
giving her dinner?’ 

The hell with it, Johnny thought. Let the girls listen even if 
he sounded lousy. He called up a band leader he knew in Palm 
Springs and asked him to send over a mandolin for Nino. The 
band leader protested, ‘Hell, nobody plays a mandolin in 
California.* Johnny yelled, ‘Just get one.’ 

The house was loaded with recording equipment and 
Johnny had the two girls work the turn-off and volumes. After 
they had dinner, Johnny went to work. He had Nino playing 

383 



the mandolin as accompaniment and sang all his old songs. 
He sang them all the way out» not nursing his voice at aU. 
throat was fine» he felt that he could sing fot ever. In the 
months he had not been able to sing he had often thought about 
singing, planned out how he would phrase lyrics differently 
now than as a kid. He had sung the songs in his head with 
more sophisticated variations of emphasis. Now he was doing 
it for red. Sometimes it would go wrong in the actual singing, 
stuff that had sounded good when he heard it just in his head 
didn’t work out when he tried it really singing out loud. 
OUT LOUD, he thought. He wasn’t listening to himself 
now, he was concentrating on performing. He fumbled a little 
on timing but that was OK, just rusty. He had a metronome 
in his head that would never fail him. Just a little practice was 
all he needed. 

Finally he stopped singing. Tina came over to him with eyes 
shining and gave him a long kiss. ‘ Now I know why Mother 
goes to all your movies,’ she said. It was the wrong thing to 
say at any time except this. Johnny and Nino laughed. 

They played the feedback and now Johnny could reaUy 
listen to himself. His voice had changed, changed a hell of a 
lot but was still unquestionably the voice of Johnny Fontane. 
It had become much richer and darker as he had noticed before 
but there was also the quality of a man singing rather than a 
boy. The voice had more true emotion, more character. And 
the technical part of his singing was far superior to anything 
he had ever done. It was nothing less than masterful. And if 
he was that good now, rusty as hell, how good would he be 
when he got in shape again? Johnny grinned at Nino. 'Is 
that as good as 1 think it is?’ 

'Nino looked at his happy face thoughtfully. 'It’s very damn 
good,’ he said. 'But let’s see how you sing tomorrow.’ 

Johnny was hurt that Nino should be so downbeat. 'You 
son of a bitch, you know you can’t sing like that. Don’t worry 
about tomorrow. I feel great.* But he didn’t sing any more that 
night. He and Nino took the girls to a party and Tina spent 
the night in his bed but he wasn’t much good there. The girl 
was a little disappointed. But what the hell, you couldn’t do 
everything all in one day, Johnny thought. 

3«4 



He woke up in the morning with a sense of apprehension, 
with a vague terror that he had dreamed his voice had come 
back. Then when he was sure it was not a dream he got scared 
that his voice would be shot again. He went to the window and 
hummed a bit, then he went down to the living room still in 
his pyjamas. He picked out a tunc on the piano and after a 
while tried singing with it. He sang mutedly but there was no 
pain, no hoarseness in his throat, so he turned it on. The 
chords were true and rich, he didn’t have to force it at all. 
Easy, easy, just pouring out. Johnny realized that the bad time 
was over, he had it all now. And it didn’t matter a damn if he 
fell on his face with movies, it didn’t matter if he couldn’t 
get it up with Tina the night before, it didn’t matter that Vir- 
ginia would hate him being able to sing again. For a moment 
he had just one regret. If only his voice had come back to him 
while trying to sing for his daughters, how lovely that would 
have been. That would have been so lovely. 

The hotel nurse had come into the room wheeling a cart 
loaded with medication. Johnny got up and stared down at 
Nino, who was sleeping or maybe dying. He knew Nino 
wasn’t jealous of his getting his voice back. He understood 
that Nino was only jealous because he was so happy about get- 
ting his voice back. That he cared so much about singing. For 
what was very obvious now was that Nino Valenti didn’t care 
enough about anything to make him want to stay alive. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN ‘ 


Michael Cor leone arrived late in the evening and, by 
his own order, was not met at the airport. Only two men 
accompanied him: Tom Hagen and a new bodyguard, named 
Albert Ncri. 

The most lavish suite of rooms in the hotel had been set 
aside for Michael and his party. Already waiting in that suite 
were the people it would be necessary for Michael to sec. 

385 


Godfather ] 3 



Freddie greeted his brother with a warm embrace. Freddie 
was much stouter, more benevolent-looking, ch^fid^ and £ar 
more dandified. He wore an exquisitely tailored grey silk suit 
and accessories to match. His hair was ra2or cut and arranged 
as carefully as a movie star’s, his face glowed with perfect 
barbering, and his hands were manicured. He was an altogether 
different man than the one who had been shipped out of New 
York four years before. 

He leaned back and surveyed Michael fondly. ‘You look a 
hell of a lot better now that you got your face fixed. Your wife 
finally talked you into it, huh? How is Kay? When she gonna 
come out and visit us out here?’ 

Michael smiled at his brother. ‘You’re looking pretty good 
too. Kay would have come out this time, but she’s carrying 
another kid and she has the baby to look after. Besides this is 
business, Freddie, I have to fly back tomorrow night or the 
morning after.* 

‘You have to eat something first,’ Freddie said. ‘ We’ve got a 
great chef in the hotel, you’ll get the best food you ever ate. Go 
take your shower and change and ever3^thing will be set up right 
here. I have all the people you want to see lined up, they’ll be 
waiting around for when you’re ready, I just have to call them.’ 

Michael said pleasantly, ‘Let’s save Moc Greene to the end, 
OK? Ask Johnny Fontane and Nino up to cat with us. And 
Lucy and her doctor friend. We can tsdk while we cat.’ He 
turned to Hagen. ‘Anybody you want to add to that, Tom?’ 

Hagen shook his head. Freddie had greeted him much less 
affectionately than Michael, but Hagen understood. Freddie 
was on his father’s shit list and Freddie naturally blamed the 
C^nsigliori for not straightening things out. Hagen would 
gladly have done so, but he didn’t know why Freddie was in 
his father’s bad graces. The Don did not give voice to specific 
grievances. He just made his displeasure felt. 

It was after midnight before they gathered around the special 
dinner table set up in Michael’s suite. Lucy kissed Michad and 
didn’t comment on his face looking so much better after the 
operation. Jules Segal boldly studied the repaired cheekbone 
and said to Michael, ‘A good job. It’s knitted nicely. Is the 
sinus OK?’ 


386 



*Fine,’ Midmel said. ‘Thanks for helping out/ 

Dinner focused on Michael as they ate. They all noted his 
resemblance in speech and manner to the Don. In some 
carious way he inspired the same respect, the same awe, and 
yet he was perfectly natural, at pains to put everyone at their 
ease. Hagen as usual remained in the background. The new 
man they did not know; Albert Neri was also very quiet and 
unobtrusive. He had claimed he was not hungry and sat in an 
armchair close to the door reading a local newspaper. 

After they had had a few drinks and food, the waiters were 
dismissed. I^chael spoke to Johnny Fontane. ‘ Hear your voice 
is back as good as ever, you got all your old fans back. Con- 
gratulations/ 

‘Thanks,’ Johnny said. He was curious about exactly why 
Michael wanted to see him. What favour would he be asked? 

Michael addressed them all in general. ‘ The Corleonc Family 
is thinking of moving out here to Vegas. Selling out all oui 
interests in the olive oil business and settling here. The Don 
and Hagen and myself have talked it over and we think here 
is where the future is for the Family. That doesn’t mean right 
now or next year. It may take two, three, even four years to 
get things squared away. But that’s the general plan. Some 
friends of ours own a good percentage of this hotel and casino 
so that will be our foundation. Moe Greene will sell us his 
interest so it can be wholly owned by friends of the Family.’ 

Freddie’s moon face was anxious. ‘Mike, you sure about 
Moe Greene selling? He never mentioned it to me and he loves 
the business. I really don’t think he’ll sell.’ 

Michael said quietly, ‘I’ll make him an offer he can’t refuse.' 

The words were said in an ordinary voice, yet the effect was 
chilling, perhaps because it was a favourite phrase of the Don’s. 
Michael turned to Johnny Fontane. ‘The Don is counting on 
you to help us get started. It’s been explained to us that enter- 
tainment will be the big factor in drawing gamblers. We hope 
you’ll sign a contract to appear five times a year for maybe a 
week-long engagement. We hope your friends in movies do 
the same. You’ve done them a lot of favours, now you can call 
them in.’ 

‘ Sure,* Johnny said. ‘ I’ll do anything for my Godfather, you 

J87 



know that, Mike.’ But there was just the faint shadow of doubt 
in his voice. 

Michael soiled and said, ‘You won’t lose money on the deal 
and neither will your friends. You get points in the hotel, and 
if there’s somebody else you think important enough, they get 
some points too. Maybe you don’t believe me, so let me say 
I’m speaking the Don’s words.’ 

Johnny said hurriedly, ‘I believe you, Mike. But there’s ten 
more hotels and casinos being built on the Strip right now. 
When you come in, the market may be glutted, you may be 
too late with all that competition already there.’ 

Tom Hagen spoke up. ‘The Corleone Family has friends 
who arc financing three of those hotels.’ Johnny understood 
immediately that he meant the Corleone Family owned the 
three hotels, with their casinos. And that there would be 
plenty of points to give out. 

‘I’ll start working on it,’ Johnny said. 

Michael turned to Lucy and Jules Segal. ‘I owe you,’ he 
said to Jules. ‘1 hear you want to go back to cutting people up 
and that hospitals won’t let you use their facilities because of 
that old abortion business. I have to know from you, is that 
what you want?’ 

Jules smiled. ‘I guess so. But you don’t know the medical 
set-up. Whatever power you have doesn’t mean anything to 
them. I’m afraid you can’t help me in that.’ 

Michael nodded absentmindedly. ‘Sure, you’re right. But 
some friends of mine, pretty well-known people, are going to 
build a big hospital for Las Vegas. The town will need it the 
way it’s growing and the way it’s projected to grow. Maybe 
they’ll let you into the operating room if it’s put to them right. 
Hell, how many surgeons as good as you can they get to come 
out to this desert? Or any half as good? We’ll be doing the 
hospital a favour. So stick around. 1 hear you and Lucy are 
going to get married?’ 

Jules shrugged. * When I see that I have any future.’ 

Lucy said wryly, ‘Mike, if you don’t build that hospital. I’ll 
die an old maid.’ 

They all laughed. All except Jules. He said to Michael, ‘If 1 
took a job like that there couldn’t be any strings attached.’ 

588 



Michael said coldly, *No strings. 1 just owe you and I want 
to even out.* 

Lucy said gently, ‘Mike, don*t get sore.* 

Michael smiled at her. ‘I*m not sore.’ He turned to Jules. 
‘That was a dumb thing for you to say. The Corleonc Family 
has pulled some strings for you. Do you think I’m so stupid 
I’d ask you to do things you’d hate to do? But if I did, so 
what? Who the hell else ever lifted a finger to help you when 
you were in trouble? When I heard you wanted to get back 
to being a real surgeon, I took a lot of time to find out if I 
could help. I can. I’m not asking you for anything. But at 
least you can consider our relationship friendly, and I assume 
you would do for me what you’d do for any good friend. 
That’s my string. But you can refuse it.’ 

Tom Hagen lowered his head and smiled. Not even the Don 
himself could have done it any better. 

Jules was flushing. ‘Mike, I didn’t mean it that way at 
all. I’m very grateful to you and your father. Forget I said 
it.* 

Michael nodded and said, ‘Fine. Until the hospital gets built 
and opens up you’ll be medical director for the four hotels. 
Get yourself a staff. Your money goes up too, but you can 
discuss that with Tom at a later time. And Lucy, I want you 
to do something more important. Maybe coordinate all the 
shops that will be opening up in the hotel arcades. On the 
financial side. Or maybe hiring the girls we need to work in 
the casinos, something like that. So if Jules doesn’t marry you, 
you can be a rich old maid.’ 

Freddie had been puffing on his cigar angrily. Michael 
turned to him and said gently, ‘I’m just the errand boy for the 
Don, Freddie. What he wants you to do he’ll tell you himself, 
naturally, but I’m sure it will be something big enough to 
make you happy. Everybody tells us what a great job you’ve 
been doing out here.’ 

‘Then why is he sore at me?* Freddie asked plaintively. 
‘Just because the casino has been losing money ? I don’t control 
that end, Moe Greene does. What the hell does the old man 
want from me?’ 

‘Don’t worry about it,* Michael said. He turned to Johnny 

389 



Fontane. * Where's Nino? 1 was looking forward to seeing him 
again/ 

Johnny shrugged. ' Nino is pretty sick. A nurse is taking care 
of him in his room. But the doc here says he should be com- 
mitted, that he’s trying to kill himself. Ninol’ 

Michael said thoughtfully, really surprised, ^Nino was al- 
ways a real good guy- 1 never knew him to do anything lousy, 
say anything to put anybody down. He never gave a damn 
about anything. Except the booze.’ 

* Yeah,’ Johnny said. ‘ llae money is rolling in, he could get a 
lot of work, singing or in the movies. He gets fifty grand a 
picture now and he blows it. He doesn’t give a damn about 
being famous. All the years we’ve been buddies I’ve never 
known him to do anything creepy. And the son of a bitch is 
drinking himself to death.’ 

Jules was about to say something when there was a knock 
on the door of the suite. He was surprised when the man in 
the armchair, the man nearest the door, did not answer it but 
kept reading the newspaper. It was Hagen who went to open 
it. And was almost brushed aside when Moe Greene came 
striding into the room followed by his two bodyguards. 

Moe Greene was a handsome hood who had made his rep as 
a Murder Incorporated executioner in Brooklyn. He had 
branched out into gambling and gone west to seek his fortune, 
had been the first person to see the possibilities of Las Vegas 
and built one of the first hotel casinos on the Strip. He still 
had murderous tantrums and was feared by everyone in the 
hotel, not excluding Freddie, Lucy and Jules Segal. They 
always stayed out of his way whenever possible. 

His handsome face was grim now. He said to Michael Cor- 
leone, ‘I’ve been waiting around to talk to you, Mike. I got a 
lot of things to do tomorrow so 1 figured I’d catch you tonight. 
How about it?’ 

Michael Corleone looked at him with what seemed to be 
friendly astonishment. * Sure,’ he said. He motioned in Hagen’s 
direction. *Get Mr Greene a drink, Tom.* 

Jules noticed that the man called Albert Neri was studying 
Moe Greene intently, not paying any attention to the b^y- 
guards who were leaning against the door. He knew there was 


590 



no chance of any violence, not in Vegas itself. That was 
strictly forbidden as fatal to the whole project of making Vegas 
the legal sanctuary of American gamblers. 

Moe Greene said to his bodyguards, ‘Draw some chips for 
all these people so that they can gamble on the house.* He 
obviously meant Jules, Lucy, Johnny Fontane, and MichacFs 
bodyguard, Albert Neri. 

Michael Corleone nodded agreeably. ‘That’s a good idea.’ 
It was only then that Neri got out of his chair and prepared to 
follow the others out. 

After the goodbyes were said, there were Freddie, Tom 
Hagen, Moe Greene and Michael Corleone left in the room. 

Greene put his drink down on the table and said with barely 
controlled fury, ‘What’s this 1 hear the Corleone Family is 
going to buy me out? I’ll hxxj you out. You don’t buy me out.’ 

Michael said reasonably, ‘Your casino has been losing 
money against all the odds. There’s something wrong with the 
way you operate. Maybe we can do better.’ 

Greene kughed harshly. ‘You goddamn Dagos, 1 do you a 
favour and take Freddie in when you’re having a bad time and 
now you push me out. That’s what you think. 1 don’t get 
pushed out by nobody and I got friends that will back me up.’ 

Michael was still quietly reasonable. ‘You took Freddie in 
because the Corleone Family gave you a big chunk of money 
to finish furnishing your hotel. And bankroll your casino. 
And because the Molinari Family on the Coast guaranteed his 
safety and gave you some service for taking him in. The Cor- 
leone Family and you are evened out. I don’t know what you’re 
getting sore about. We’ll buy your share at any reasonable 
price you name, what’s wrong with that? What’s unfair about 
that? With your casino losing money we’re doing you a 
favour.’ 

Greene shook his head. ‘The Corleone Family don’t have 
that much muscle any more. The Godfather is sick. You’re 
getting chased out of New York by the other Families and you 
think you can find easier pickings here. I’ll give you some 
advice, Mike, don’t try.’ 

Michael said softly, ‘Is riiat why you thought you could slap 
Freddie around in public?’ 


59 » 



Tom Hagen, startled, turned his attention to Freddie. 
Freddie Corlcone’s fece was getting red. ‘Ah, Mike, that 
wasn’t anything. Moe didn’t mean anything. He flies oiT the 
handle sometimes, but me and him are good friends. Right, 
Moe?’ 

Greene was wary. ‘Yeah, sure. Sometimes I got to kick asses 
to make this place run right. 1 got sore at Freddie because he 
was banging all the cocktail Vaitresses and letting them goof 
off on the job. We had a little argument and I straightened him 
out.’ 

Michael’s face was impassive when he said to his brother, 
‘You straightened out, Freddie?’ 

Freddie stared sullenly at his younger brother. He didn’t 
answer. Greene laughed and said, ‘The son of a bitch was 
taking them to bed two at a time, the old sandwich job. Fred- 
die, I gotta admit you really put it to those broads. Nobody 
else could make them happy after you got through with them.’ 

Hagen saw that this had caught Michael by surprise. They 
looked at each other. This was perhaps the real reason the Don 
was displeased with Freddie. The Don was straitlaced about 
sex. He would consider such cavorting by his son Freddie, two 
girls at a time, as degeneracy. Allowing himself to be physically 
humiliated by a man like Moe Greene would decrease respect 
for the Corleone Family. That too w^ould be part of the reason 
for being in his father’s bad books. 

Michael rising from his chair, said, in a tone of dismissal, ‘I 
have to get back to New York tomorrow, so think about your 
price.’ 

Greene said savagely, ‘You son of a bitch, you think you 
can just brush me off like that? 1 killed more men than you 
before I could jerk off. I’ll fly to New York and talk to the 
Don himself. I’ll make him an offer.’ 

Freddie said nervously to Tom Hagen, ‘Tom, you’re the 
Consigliori^ you can talk to the Don and advise him.’ 

It was then that Michael turned the full chilly blast of his 
personality on the two Vegas men. ‘ The Don has sort of semi- 
retired,’ he said. *I’m running the Family business now. And 
I’ve moved Tom from the ConsigUori spot. He’ll be strictly 
my lawyer here in Vegas. He’ll be moving out with his flunily 


59 * 



in a couple of months to get all the legal work started. So any- 
thing you have to say, say it to me.* 

Nobody answered. Michael said formally, ‘Freddie, you’re 
my older brother, I have respect for you. But don’t ever take 
sides with anybody against the Family again. I won’t even 
mention it to the Don.* He turned to Moe Greene. ‘Don’t 
insult people who are trying to help you. You’d do better to 
use your energy to find out why the casino is losing money. 
The Corleone Family has big dough invested here and we’re not 
getting our money’s worth, but I still didn’t come here to abuse 
you. I offer you a helping hand. Well, if you prefer to spit on 
that helping hand, that’s your business. I can’t say any more.’ 

He had not once raised his voice but his words had a sober- 
ing effect on both Greene and Freddie. Michael stared at both 
of them, moving away from the table to indicate that he ex- 
pected them both to leave. Hagen went to the door and opened 
it. Both men left without saying goodnight. 

The next morning Michael Q>rlconc got the message from 
Moe Greene: he would not sell his share of the hotel at any 
price. It was Freddie who delivered the message. Michael 
shrugged and said to his brother, ‘I want to sec Nino before I 
go back to New York.’ 

In Nino’s suite they found Johimy Fontane sitting on the 
couch eating breakfast. Jules was examining Nino behind the 
closed drapes of the bedroom. Finally the drapes were drawn 
back. 

Michael was shocked at how Nino looked. The man was 
visibly disintegrating. The eyes were dazed, the mouth loose, 
all the muscles of his face slack. Michael sat on his bedside and 
said, ‘Nino, it’s good to catch up with you. The Don always 
asks about you.’ 

Nino grinned, it was the old grin. ‘Tell him I’m dying. Tell 
him show business is more dangerous than the olive oil 
business.’ 

‘ You’ll be OK,’ Michael said. ‘If there’s anything bothering 
you that the Family can help, just tell me.* 

Nino shook his head. ‘There’s nothing,’ he said. ‘Nothing.’ 

Michael chatted fot a few more moments and then l<3it. 


593 



Freddie accompanied him and his party to the airport, but at 
Michael’s request didn’t hang around for departure time. As 
they boarded the plane with Tom Hagen and A1 Neri, Michael 
turned to Neri and said, ‘Did you make him good?’ 

Neri tapped his forehead. ‘I got Moe Greene mugged and 
numbered up here.’ 


CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT 


On the plane ride back to New York, Michael Cotleone re- 
laxed and tried to sleep. It was useless. The most terrible period 
of his life was approachmg, perhaps even a fatal time. It could 
no longer be put off. Everything was in readiness, all pre- 
cautions had been taken, two years of precautions. There 
could be no further delay. Last week when the Don had for- 
mally announced his retirement to the capote^mes and other 
members of the Cotleone Family, Michael knew that this was 
his father’s way of telling him the time was ripe. 

It was almost three years now since he had returned home 
and over two years since he had married Kay. The three years 
had been spent in learning the Family business. He had put 
in long hours with Tom Hagen, long hours with the Don. 
He was amazed at how wealthy and powerful the Cotleone 
Family truly was. It owned tremendously valuable real estate 
in midtown New York, whole office buildings. It owned, 
through fronts, partnerships in two Wall Street brokerage 
houses, pieces of banks on Long Island, partnerships in some 
garment centre firms, all this in addition to its illegal operations 
in gambling. . 

ilaic most interesting thing Michael Corleone learned, in 
going back over past transactions of the Corleone Family, was 
that the Family had received some protection income shortly 
after the war from a group of music record counterfeiters. The 
counterfeiters duplicated and sold phonograph records of 
fiunous artists, packaging everything so skilfully they were 
never caught. Naturally on the records they sold to stores the 


394 



artists and original production company received not a penny. 
Michael Corleone noticed ^t Johnny Fontane had lost a lot 
of money owing to this counterfeiting because at that time, 
just before he lost bis voice, his records were the most popular 
in the country. 

He asked Tom Hagen about it. Why did the Don allow the 
counterfeiters to cheat his godson? Hagen shrugged. Business 
was business. Besides, Johnny was in the Don’s bad graces, 
Johnny having divorced his childhood sweetheart to marry 
Margot Ashton. This had displeased the Don greatly. 

‘How come these' guys stopped their operation?’ Michael 
asked. ‘The cops got on to them?* 

Hagen shook his head. ‘The Don withdrew his protection. 
That was right after Connie’s wedding.’ 

It was a pattern he was to see often, the Don helping , those 
in misfortune whose misfortune he had partly created. Not 
perhaps out of cunning or planning but because of his variety 
of interests or perhaps because of the nature of the universe, 
the interlinking of good and evil, natural of itself. 

Michael had married Kay up in New England, a quiet 
wedding, with only her family and a few of her friends present. 
Then they had moved into one of the houses on the mall in 
Long Beach. Michael was surprised at how well Kay got along 
with his parents and the other people living on the mall. And 
of course she had got pregnant right away, like a good, old- 
style Italian wife was supposed to, and that helped. The second 
kid on the way in two years was just icing. 

Kay would be waiting for him at the airport, she always 
came to meet him, she was always so glad when he came back 
ftom a trip. And he was too. Except now. For the end of this 
trip m«mt that he finally had to take the action he had been 
groomed for over the last three years. The Don would be 
waiting for him. The capariffmts would be waiting for him. 
And he, Michael Corleone, would have to give ^e orders, 
make the decisions whidi would decide hia and his Family’s 
&te. 

Every morning when Kay Adams Corleone got up to take 
care of the baby’s early feeding, she saw Mama Corleone, the 


595 



Don’s wife, being driven away from the mall by one of the 
bodyguards, to return an hour later. Kay soon learned that 
her mothet -in-law went to church every single morning. 
Often on her return, the old woman stopped by for morning 
coffee and to see her new grandchild. 

Mama Q>rleone always started off by asking Kay why she 
didn’t think of becoming a Catholic, ignoring the fact that 
Kay’s child had already been baptised a Protestant. So Kay 
felt it was proper to ask the old woman why she went to 
church every morning, whether that was a necessary part of 
being a Catholic. 

As if she thought that this might have stopped Kay from 
converting the old woman said, ‘Oh, no, no, some Catholics 
only go to church on Easter and Christmas. You go when you 
feel like going.* 

Kay laughed. ‘Then why do you go every single morning?’ 

In a completely natural way. Mama Corleone said, ‘ 1 go for 
my husband,* she pointed down towards the floor, ‘so he 
don’t go down there.’ She paused. ‘I say prayers for his soul 
every day so he go up there.’ She pointed heavenward. She 
said this with an impish smile, as if she were subverting her 
husband’s will in some way, or as if it were a losing cause. It 
was said jokingly almost, in her grim, Italian, old crone 
fashion. And as always when her husband was not present, 
there was an attitude of disrespect to the great Don. 

‘How is your husband feeling?* Kay asked politely. 

Mama Corleone shrugged. ‘He’s not the same man since 
they shot him. He lets I^chael do all the work, he just plays 
the fool with his garden, his peppers, his tomatoes. As if he 
wdre some peasant still. But men are always like that.’ 

Later in the morning Connie Corleone would walk across 
the mall with her two children to pay Kay a visit and chat. 
Kay liked Connie, her vivaciousness, her obvious fondness for 
her brother Michael. Connie had taught Kay how to cook some 
Italian dishes but sometimes brought her own more expert 
concoctions over for Michael to taste. 

Now this morning as she usually did, she asked Kay what 
Michael thought of her husband. Carlo. Did Michael really 
like Carlo, as he seemed to? Carlo had always had a little 

596 



trouble with the Family but now over the last years he had 
straightened out. He was really doing well in the labour union 
but he had to work so hard, such long hours. Girlo really 
liked Michael, Connie always said. But then, everybody liked 
Michael, just as everybody liked her father. Micha^ was the 
Don all over again. It was the best thing that Michael was 
going to run the Family olive oil business. 

Kay had observed before that when Connie spoke about her 
husband in relation to the Family, she was always nervously 
eager for some word of approval for Carlo. Kay would have 
been stupid if she had not noticed the almost terrified concern 
Connie had for whether Michael liked Carlo or not. One night 
she spoke to Michael about it and mentioned the fact that no- 
body ever spoke about Sonny Corleone, nobody even referred 
to him, at least not in her presence. Kay had once tried to ex- 
press her condolences to the Don and his wife and had been 
listened to with almost rude silence and then ignored. £>he 
had tried to get Connie talking about her older brother with- 
out success. 

Sonny’s wife, Sandra, had taken her children and moved to 
Florida, where her own parents nov/ lived. Certain financial 
arrangements had been made so that she and her children could 
live comfortably, but Sonny had left no estate. 

Michael reluctantly explained what had happened the night 
Sonny was killed. That Carlo had beaten his wife and Connie 
had called the mall and Sonny had taken the call and rushed 
out in a blind rage. So naturally Connie and Carlo were always 
nervous that the rest of the Family blamed her for indirectly 
causing Sonny’s death. Or blamed her husband. Carlo. But 
this wasn’t the case. The proof was that they had given Connie 
and Carlo a house in the mall itself and promoted Carlo to an 
important job in the labour union set-up. And Carlo had 
straightened out, stopped drinking, stopped whoring, stopped 
trying to be a wise guy. The Family was pleased with his work 
and attitude for the last two years. Nobody blamed him for 
what had happened. 

‘Then why don’t you invite them over some evening and 
you can reassure your sister?’ Kay said. ‘The poor thing is 
always so nervous about what you think of her husband. 


397 



Tell her. And tell her to put those silly worries out of her 
head.* 

can*t do that/ Michael said. *We don’t talk about those 
things in our family.’ 

‘Do you want me to tell her what you’ve told me?’ Kay 
said. 

She was puzzled because he took such a long time thinking 
over a suggestion that was obviously the proper thing to do. 
Finally he said, ‘I don’t think you should, Kay. I don’t think 
it will do any good. She’ll worry anyway. It’s something no- 
body can do anything about.’ 

Kay was amazed. She realized that Michael was always a 
little colder to his sister Connie than he was to anyone else, 
despite Connie’s aifection. * Surely you don’t blame Connie for 
Sonny being killed?’ she said. 

Michael sighed. ‘Of course not,* he said. ‘She’s my kid 
sister and I’m very fond of her. I feel sorry for her. Carlo 
straightened out, but he’s really the wrong kind of husband. 
It’s just one of those things. Let’s forget about it.’ 

It was not in Kay’s nature to nag; she let it drop. Also she 
had learned that Michael was not a man to push, that he could 
become coldly disagreeable. She knew she was the only person 
in the world who could bend his will, bxit she also knew that 
to do it too often would be to destroy that power. And living 
■with him the last two years had made her love him more. 

She loved him because he was always fair. An odd thing. 
But he always was fair to everybody around him, never arbi- 
trary even in little things. She had observed that he was now a 
very powerful man, people came to the house to confer with 
him and ask favours, treating him with deference and respect 
but one thing had endeared him to her above everything dse.. 

Ever since Michael had come back from Sicily with his 
broken face, everybody in the Family had tried to get him to 
undergo corrective surgery. Michael’s mother was after him 
constantly; one Sunday dinner with all the Corleones gathered 
on the mall she shouted at Michael, ‘ You look like a gangster 
in the movies, get your face fixed for the sake of Jesus Christ 
and your poor wife. And so your nose will stop running like a 
drunken Irish.’ 


598 



The Don, at the head of the table, watching everything, said 
to Kay, *Docs it bother you?* 

Kay shook her head. Tlie Don said to his wife, ‘He’s out of 
your bands, it’s no concern of yours.’ The old woman im- 
mediately held her peace. Not that she feared her husband but 
because it would have been disrespectful to dispute him in 
such a matter before the others. 

But Connie, the Don’s favourite, came in from the kitchen 
where she was cooking the Sunday dinner, her face flushed 
from the stove, and said, think he should get his flice fixed. 
He was the most handsome one in the family before he got 
hurt. Come on, Mike, say you’ll do it.’ 

Michael looked at her in an absentminded fashion. It seemed 
as if he really and truly had not heard anything said. He didn’t 
answer. 

Connie came to stand beside her father. ‘Make him do it,’ 
she said to the Don. Her two hands rested affectionately on his 
shoulders and she rubbed his neck. She was the only one who 
was ever so familiar with the Don. Her affection for her father 
was touching. It was trusting, like a little girl’s. The Don 
patted one of her hands and said, ‘We’re all starving here. Put 
the spaghetti on the table and then chatter.’ 

Connie turned to her husband and said, ‘Carlo, you tell 
Mike to get his face flxed. Maybe he’ll listen to you.’ Her voice 
implied that Michael and Carlo Rhezi had some friendly re- 
lationship over and above anyone else’s. 

Carlo, handsomely sunburned, blond hair neatly cut and 
combed, sipped at his glass of homemade wine and said, ‘No- 
body can tell Mike wl^t to do.’ Carlo had become a different 
man since moving into the mall. He knew his place in the 
Family and kept to it. 

There was something that Kay didn’t understand in all this, 
something that didn’t quite meet the eye. As a woman she 
could see that Connie was deliberately charming her father, 
though it was beautifully done and even sincere. Yet it was not 
spontaneous. Carlo’s reply had been a manly knuckling of his 
forehead. Michael had absolutely ignored everything. 

Kay didn’t care about her husband’s disfigurement but she 
worried about his sinus trouble which sprang from it. Surgery 


599 



repair of the face would cure the sinus also. For that reason she 
wanted Michael to enter the hospital and get the necessary 
work done. But she understood that in a curious way he desired 
his disfigurement. She was sure that the Don understood this 
too. 

But after Kay gave birth to her first child, she was surprised 
by Michael asking her, ‘ Do you want me to get my face fixed ? * 

Kay nodded. ‘You know how kids are, your son will feel 
bad about your face when he gets old enough to understand 
it’s not normal. I just don’t want our child to see it. 1 don’t 
mind at all, honestly, Michael.’ 

‘OK.’ He smiled at her. ‘I’ll do it.’ 

He waited until she was home from the hospital and then 
made all the necessary arrangements. The operation was suc- 
cessful. The cheek indentation was now just barely noticeable. 

Everybody in the Family was delighted, but Connie more so 
than anyone. She visited Michael every day in the hospital, 
dragging Carlo along. When Michael came home, she gave 
him a big hug and a kiss and looked at him admiringly and 
said, ‘Now you’re my handsome brother again.’ 

Only the Don was unimpressed, shrugging his shoulders 
and remarking, ‘What’s the difference?’ 

But Kay was grateful. She knew that Michael had done it 
against all his own inclinations. Had done it because she had 
asked him to, and that she was the only person in the world 
who could make him act against his own nature. 

On the afternoon of Michael’s return from Vegas, Rocco 
Lampone drove the limousine to the mall to pick up Kay so 
that she could meet her husband at the airport. She always met 
her husband when he arrived from out of town, mostly because 
she felt lonely without him, living as she did in the fortified 
mall. 

She saw him come off the plane with Tom Hagen and the 
new man he had working for him, Albert Neri. Kay didn’t 
care much for Neri, he reminded her of Luca Brasi in ^ quiet 
ferociousness. She saw Neri drop behind Michael and ,off to 
the side, saw his quick penetrating glance as his eyes swept 
over everybody nearby. It was Neri who first spotted Kay and 


400 



touched Michael’s shoulder to make him look in the proper 
direction. 

Kay ran into her husband’s arms and he quickly kissed her 
and let her go. He and Tom Hagen and Kay got into the 
limousine and Albert Neri vanished. Kay did not notice that 
Neri had got into another car with two other men and that thb 
car rode behind the limousine until it reached Long Beach. 

Kay never asked Michael how his business had gone. Even 
such polite questions were understood to be awkward, not 
that he wouldn’t give her an equally polite answer, but it 
would remind them both of the forbidden territory their mar- 
riage could never include. Kay didn’t mind any more. But 
when Michael told her he would have to spend the evening 
with his father Xp tell him about the Vegas trip, she couldn’t 
help making a little frown of disappointment. 

‘I’m sorry,’ Michael said. ‘Tomorrow night we’ll go into 
New York and see a show and have dinner, OK?* He pjitted 
her stomach, she was almost seven months pregnant. ‘After 
the kid comes you’ll be tied down again. Hell, you’re more 
Italian than Yankee. Two kids in two years.’ 

Kay said tartly, ‘And you’re more Yankee than Italian. Your 
first evening home and you spend it on business.’ But she 
smiled at him when she said it. ‘You won’t be home late?’ 

‘Before midnight,’ Michael said. ‘Don’t wait up for me if 
you feel tired.’ 

‘I’ll wait up,’ Kay said. 

At the meeting that night, in the corner room library of Don 
Corleone’s house, were the Don himself, Michael, Tom Hagen, 
Carlo Rizzi, and the two caporegimes, Qemenza and Tessio. 

The atmosphere of the meeting was by no means so con- 
genial as in former days. Ever since Don Corleone had an- 
nounced his semi-retirement and Michael’s take-over of the 
Family business, there had been some strain. Succession in 
control of such an enterprise as the Family was by no means 
hereditary. In any other Family powerful caporegimes such as 
Qemenza and Tessio might have succeeded to the position of 
Don. Or at least they might have been allowed to split off and 
form their own Family. 


401 



Then, too, ever since Don Q>rleone had made the peace 
with the Five Families, the strength of the Corleone Family 
had declined. The Baizini Family was now indisputably the 
most powerful one in the New York area; allied as they were 
to the Tattaglias, they now held the position the Corleone 
Family had once held. Also they were slyly whittling down the 
power of the Corleone Family, muscling into their gambling 
areas, testing the Corleones’ reactions and, finding them weak, 
establishing their own bookmakers. 

The Barsinis and Tattaglias were delighted with the Don*8 
retirement. Michael, formidable as he might prove to be, could 
never hope to equal the Don in cunning and infiuence for at 
least another decade. The Corleone Family was definitely in a 
decline. 

It had, of course, suffered serious misfortunes. Freddie had 
proved to be nothing more than an innkeeper and a ladies’ 
man, the idiom for ladies’ man untranslatable but connotating 
a greedy infant always at its mother’s nipple - in short, un- 
manly. Sonny’s death too, had been a disaster. Sonny had been 
a man to be feared, not to be taken lightly. Of course he had 
made a mistake in sending his younger brother, Michael, to 
kill the Turk and the police captain. Though necessary in a 
tactical sense, as a long-term strategy it proved to be a serious 
error. It had forced the Don, eventually, to rise from his sick- 
bed, It had deprived Michael of two years of valuable experi- 
ence and training under his father’s tutelage. And of course an 
Irish as a Consigliort had been the only foolishness the Don had 
ever perpetrat^. No Irish man could hope to equal a Sicilian 
for cunning. So went the opinion of all the Families and they 
were natur^y more respectful to the Barzini-Tattaglia alliance 
than to the Corleones. Their opinion of Michael was that be 
was not equal to Sonny in force though more intelligent cer- 
tainly, but not as intelligent as his father. A mediocre successor 
and a man not to be feared too greatly. 

Also, though the Don was generally admired for his states- 
manship in making the peace, the fact that he had not avenged 
Sonny’s murder lost the Family a great deal of respect. It was 
recognized that such statesmanship sprang out of weakness. 

All this was known to the men sitting in the room and 


402 



perhaps even believed by a £ew. Carlo Riazi liked Michael but 
did not fear him as he had feared Sonny. Qemenaa, too» 
though he gave Michael credit for a bravura performance with 
the Turk and the police captain, could not help thinking 
Michael was too soft to be a Don. Qemenaa had hoped to be 
given permission to form his own Family, to have his own 
empire split away from the Corleone. But the Don had in- 
dicated that this was not to be and Qemenza respected the 
Don too much to disobey. Unless of course the whole situ- 
ation became intolerable. 

Tessio had a better opinion of Michael. He sensed something 
else in the young man: a force cleverly kept hidden, a man 
jealously guarding his true strength from public gaze, follow- 
ing the Don’s precept that a friend should always under- 
estimate your virtues and an enemy overestimate your faults. 

The Don himself and Tom Hagen were of course under no 
illusions about Michael. The Don would never have remed 
if he had not had absolute faith in his son’s ability to retrieve 
the Family position. Hagen had been Michael’s teller for the 
last two years and was amazed. at how quickly Michael 
grasped all the intricacies of the Family business. Truly his 
father’s son. 

Qemenza and Tessio were annoyed with Michael because he 
had reduced the strength of their regimes and had never recon- 
stituted Sonny’s regime. The Corleone Family, in effect, had 
now only two fighting divisions with less personnel than 
formerly. Qemenza and Tessio considered this suicidal, 
especially with the Barzini-Tattaglia encroachments on their 
empires. So now they were hopeful these errors might be 
corrected at this extraordinary meeting convened by the 
Don. 

Michael started off by telling them about his trip to Vegas 
and Moc Greene’s refusing the offer to buy him out. ‘But we’U 
make him an offer he can’t refuse,’ Michael said. ‘You already 
know the Corleone Family plans to move its operations West. 
We’ll have four of the hotel casinos on the Strip. But it can’t 
be right away. We need time to get things straightened out.’ 
He spoke directly to Qemenza. ‘Pete, you and Tessio, I want 
you to go along with me for a year without questioning and 



without reservations. At the end of that year, both of you can 
split off from the Corleone Family and be your own bosses, 
have your own Families. Of course it goes without saying 
we’d maintain our friendship, I wouldn’t insult you and your 
respect for my father by thinking otherwise for a minute. But 
up until that time I want you just to follow my lead and don’t 
worry. There are negotiations going on that will solve prob- 
lems that you think are not solvable. So just be a litde patient.’ 

Tessio spoke up. ‘If Moe Greene wanted to talk to your 
father, why not let him? The Don could always persuade any- 
body, there was never anyone who could stand up to his 
reasonableness.’ 

The Don answered this directly. ‘I’ve retired. Michael would 
lose respect if I interfered. And besides that’s a man I’d rather 
not talk to.’ 

Tessio remembered the stories he’d heard about Moe 
Greene slapping Freddie Corleone around one night in the 
Vegas hotel. He began to smell a rat. He leaned back. Moe 
Greene was a dead man, he thought. The Corleone Family did 
not msh to persuade him. 

Carlo Ri22i spoke up. ‘ Is the Corleone Family going to stop 
operating in New York altogether?’ 

Michael nodded. ‘We’re selling the olive oil business. Every- 
thing we can, we turn over to Tessio and Clemenza. But, 
Carlo, I don’t want you to worry about your job. You grew 
up in Nevada, you know the state, you know the people. I’m 
counting on you being my right-hand man when we make our 
move out there.’ 

Carlo leaned back, his face flushed with gratification. His 
timtf was coming, he would move in the constellations of 
power. 

Michael went on. ‘Tom Hagen is no longer the Consigliori. 
He’s going to be our lawyer in Vegas. In about two months 
he’ll move out there permanently with his family. Strictly as a 
lawyer. Nobody goes to him with any other business as of 
now, this minute. He’s a lawyer and that’s all. No reflection 
on Tom. That’s the way I want it. Besides, if I ever need any 
advice, who’s a better counsellor than my father?’ They all 
laughed. But they had got the message despite the joke. Tom 


404 



Hagen was out; he no longet held any power. They all took 
their fleeting glances to check Hagen’s reaction but his face 
was impassive. 

Qemenza spoke up in his fat man’s wheeze. ‘Then in a 
year’s time we’re on our own, is that it?’ 

‘Maybe less,* Michael said courteously. ‘Of course you can 
always remain part of the Family, that’s your choice. But most 
of our strength will be out West and maybe you’d do better 
organized on your own.* 

Tessio said quiedy, ‘In that case I think you should give us 
permission to recruit new men for our regimes. Those Barzini 
bastards keep chiselling in on my territory. 1 think maybe it 
would be wise to teach them a litde lesson in manners.’ 

Michael shook his head. ‘No. No good. Just stay still. All 
that stuff will be negotiated, everything will be straightened 
out before we leave.’ 

Tessio was not to be so easily satisfied. He spoke to the .Don 
direedy, taking a chance on incurring Michael’s ill will. ‘For- 
give me, Godfather, let our years of friendship be my excuse. 
But I think you and your son are all wrong with this Nevada 
business. How can you hope for success there without your 
strength here to back you up? The two go hand in hand. And 
with you gone from here the Barzini and the Tattaglia will be too 
strong for us. Me and Pete will have trouble, we’ll come under 
their thumb sooner or later. And Barzini is a man not to my 
taste. 1 say the Corleone Family has to make its move from 
strength, not from weakness. We should build up our regimes 
and take back our lost territories in Staten Island at least.’ 

The Don shook his head. ‘I made the peace, remember, I 
can’t go back on my word.’ 

Tessio refused to be silenced. ‘Everybody knows Barzini 
gave you provocadon since then. And besides, if Michael is the 
new chief of the Corleone Family, what’s to stop him from 
taking any Action he sees fit? Your v/ord doesn’t strictly bind 
him.’ 

Michael broke in sharply. He said to Tessio, very much the 
chief now, ‘There are things being negotiated which will 
answer your questions and resolve your doubts. If my word 
isn’t enough for you, ask your Don.’ 

405 



But Tessio understood he had finally gone too fiu:. If he 
dared to question the Den he woulc^ make Michael his enemy. 
So he shrugged and said, spoke for the good of the Family, 
not for myself. I can take care of myself.’ 

Michael gave him a friendly smile. * Tessio, 1 never doubt 
you in any way. I never did. But trust in me. Of course I’m 
not equal to you and Pete in these things, but after aU I’ve my 
fiither to guide me. I won’t do too badly, we’ll aU come out 
fine.’ 

The meeting was over. The big news was that Clememsa and 
Tessio would be permitted to form their own Families from 
their regimes. Tessio would have his gambling and docks in 
Brooklyn, Qemenaa the gambling in Manhattan and the 
Family contacts in the racing tracks of Long Island. 

The two caporegimes left not quite satisfied, still a little uneasy. 
Girlo Riaai lingered hoping that the time had come when he 
finally would be treated as one of the family, but he quickly 
saw that Michael was not of that mind. He left the Don, Tom 
Hagen, and Michael alone in the corner library room. Albert 
Neri ushered him out of the house and Carlo noticed that Neri 
stood in the doorway watching him walk across the floodlit 
mall. 

In the library the three men had relaxed as only people can 
who have lived years together in the same house, in the same 
funily. Michael served some anisette to the Don and Scotch 
to Tom Hagen. He took a drink himself, which he rarely did. 

Tom Hagen spoke up first. *Mike, why are you cutting me 
out of the action?’ 

Michael seemed surprised. ’You’ll be my number one man 
in Vegas. We’U be legitimate all the way and you’re the legal 
man. What can be more important than that?’ 

Hagen smiled a little sadly. ’I’m not talking about that. I’m 
talking about Rocco Lampone building a secret regime without 
my knowledge. I’m talking about you dealing direct with Ned 
rather than through me or a caporegme. Unless of course you 
don’t know what Lampone’s doing.’ 

Michael said softly, ’How did you find out about Lampone’s 
regime?* 

Hagen shrugged. ’Don’t worry, there’s no leak, nobody else 

406 



knc»^^'5. But in my position 1 can see vrhat’s happening. You 
gave Lamponc his own living, you gave him a Jot of freedom. 
So he needs people to help him in his little empire. But every- 
body he recruits has to be reported back to me. And I notice 
everybody he puts on the payroll is a little too good for that 
particular job, is getting a little more money than that parti- 
cular exercise is worth. You picked the right man when you 
picked Lampone, by the way. He’s operating perfectly.’ 

Michael grimaced. ‘Not so damn perfect if you noticed. 
Anyway the Don picked Lampone.’ 

‘OK,’ Tom said, ‘so why am I cut out of the action?’ 

Michael faced him and without flinching gave it to him 
straight. ‘Tom, you’re not a wartime ConsigUorL Things may 
get tough with this move we’re trying to make and we may 
have to fight. And I want to get you out of the line of hre too, 
just in case.’ 

Hagen’s face reddened. If the Don had told him the same 
thing, he would have accepted it humbly. But where the hell 
did Mike come oS making such a snap judgement? 

*OK,’ he said, ‘but I happen to agree with Tessio. 1 think 
you’re going about this all wtong. You’re making the move 
out of wealmess, not strength. That’s always bad. Barzini is 
like a wolf, and if he tears you limb from limb, the other 
Families won’t come rushing to help the Corleones.’ 

The Don finally spoke. ‘Tom, it’s not just Michael. 1 ad- 
vised him on these matters. There are things that may have to 
be done that 1 don’t want in any way to be responsible iot. 
That is my wish, not Michael’s. I never thought you were a 
bad Consiglwri. 1 thought Santino a bad Don, may his soul rest 
in peace. He had a good heart, but he wasn’t the right man to 
he^ the Family when 1 had my little misfortune. And who 
would have thought that Fredo would become a lackey of 
women? So don’t feel badly. Michael has all my confidence as 
you do. For reasons which you can’t know, you must have 
no part in what may happen. By the way, 1 told Michael that 
Lampone’s secret would not escape your eye. So that 
shows I have faith m you.* 

Michael laughed. ‘Ihonestly didn’t think youM pick that up, 
Tom.’ 


407 



Hagen knew he was being mollified. * Maybe I can help/ he 
said. 

Michael shook his head decisively. ‘You’re out, Tom.* 

Tom finished his drink and before he left he gave Michael a 
mild reproof. ‘You’re nearly as good as your father/ he told 
Michael. ‘But there’s one thing you still have to learn.’ 

‘What’s that?* Michael said politely. 

‘How to say no,’ Hagen answered. 

Michael nodded gravely. ‘You’re right/ he said. ‘I’U re- 
member that.* 

When Hagen had left. Michael said jokingly to his father, 
‘ So you’ve taught me everything else. Tell me how to say no 
to people in a way they’ll like.’ 

The Don moved to sit behind the big desk. ‘ You cannot say 
“no” to the people you love, not often. That’s the secret. And 
then when you do, it has to sound like a “ yes ”. Or you have 
to make them say “no”. You have to take time and trouble. 
But I’m old-fashioned, you’re the new modern generation, 
don’t listen to me.* 

Michael laughed. ‘Right. You agree about Tom being out, 
though, don’t you?’ 

The Don nodded. ‘ He can’t be involved in this.* 

Michael said quietly, ‘I think it’s time for me to tell you that 
what I’m going to do is not purely out of vengeance for Apol- 
lonia and Sonny. It’s the right thing to do. Tessio and Tom 
are right about the Barzinis.’ 

Don Corlcone nodded. ‘Revenge is a dish that tastes best 
when it is cold,’ he said. ‘I would not have made that peace 
but that I knew you would never come home alive otherwise. 
I’m< surprised, though, that Barzini still made a last try at you. 
Maybe it was arranged before the peace talk and he couldn’t 
stop it. Are you sure they were not after Don Tommasino?* 

Michael said, ‘That’s the way it was supposed to look. And 
it would have been perfect, even you would never have sus- 
pected. Except that I came out alive. I saw Fabrizzio going 
through the gate, running away. And of course I’ve checked 
it all out since I’ve been back.’ 

‘Have they found that shepherd?’ the Dori asked. 

‘I found him,’ Michael said. ‘I found him a year ago. He’s 

408 



got his own little pma place up in BuH'aio. New name, phony 
passport and identification. He’s doing very well is Fabrizzio 
the shepherd.’ 

The Don nodded. * So it's to no purpose to wait any longer. 
When will you start?' 

Michael said, ‘ I want to wait until after Kay has the baby. 
Just in case something goes wrong. And I want Tom settled 
in Vegas so he won’t be concerned in the affair. I think a year 
from now.* 

‘You’ve prepared for everything?’ the Don asked. He did 
not look at Michael when he said this. 

Michael said gently, ‘You have no part. You’re not re- 
sponsible. 1 take all responsibility. T would refuse to let you 
even veto. If you tried to do that now, I would leave the 
Family and go my own way. You’re not responsible.’ 

The Don was silent for a long time and then he sighed. He 
said, ‘ So be it. Maybe that’s why I retired, maybe that’s why 
I’ve turned everything over to you. I’ve done my share in life, 
I haven’t got the heart any more. And there are some duties the 
best of men can’t assume. That’s it then.’ 

During that year Kay Adams Corleone w^s delivered of a 
second child, another boy. She delivered easily, without any 
trouble whatsoever, and was welcomed back to the mall like a 
royal princess. Connie Corleone presented the baby wnth a silk 
layette handmade in Italy, enormously expensive and beautiful. 
She told Kay, ‘Carlo found it. He shopped all over New York 
to get something extra special after I couldn’t find anything I 
really liked.’ Kay smiled her thanks, understood immediately 
that she was to tell Michael this fine tale. She waa on her way 
to becoming a Sicilian. 

Also during that year, Nino Valenti died of a cerebral 
haemorrhage. His death made the front pages of the tabloids 
because the movie Johnny Fontane had featured him in had 
opened a few weeks before and was a smash hit, establishing 
Nino as a major star. The papers mentioned that Johnny 
Fontane was handling the funeral arrangements, that the 
funeral would be private, only funily and dose friends to 
attend. One sensational story even daimed that in an interview 
Johnny Fontane had blamed himself for his friend’s death, 

409 



that he should have forced his friend to place himself under 
medical care, but the reporter made it sound like the usual self- 
reproach of the sensitive but innocent bystander to a tragedy. 
Johnny Fontane had made his childhood friend, Nino Valenti, 
a movie star and what more could a friend do? 

No member of the Corleonc Family attended the California 
fimeral except Freddie. Lucy and Jules Segal attended. The 
Don himself had wanted to go to Cdifornia but had suffered a 
slight heart attack, which kept him in his bed for a month. He 
sent a huge floral wreath instead. Albert Neri was also sent 
West as the official representative of the Family. 

Two days after Nino’s funeral, Moe Greene was shot to 
death in the Hollywood home of his movie-star mistress; 
Albert Neri did not reappear in New York until almost a month 
later. He had taken his vacation in the Caribbean and returned 
to duty tanned almost black. Michael Corleone welcomed him 
with a smile and a few words of praise, which included the 
information that Neri would from then on receive an extra 
living’, the Family income from an East Side ‘book’ con- 
sidered especially rich. Neri was content, satisfied that he lived 
in a world that pioperly rewarded a man who did his duty. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE 

Michael Corleone had taken precautions against every 
eventuality. His planning was faultless, his security impeccable. 
He, was patient, hoping to use the full year to prepare. But he 
was not to get his necessary year because fate itself took a 
stand against him, and in the most surprising fashion. For it 
was the Godfather, the great Don himself, who failed Michael 
Corleone. 

On one sunny Sunday morning, while the women were at 
church, Don Vito Corleone dressed in his gardening uniform; 
baggy grey trousers, a faded blue shirt, battered dirty-brown 
fedora decorated by a stained grey silk hatband. The Don had 


410 



gained considerable weight in his few years and worked on his 
tomato vines, he said, for the sake of his health. But he deceived 
no one. 

The truth was, he loved tending his garden ; he loved the sight 
of it early on a morning. It brought back his childhood in 
Sicily sixty years ago, brought it back without the terror, the 
sorrow of his own father’s death. Now the beans in their rows 
grew little white flowers on top; strong green stalks of scallion 
fenced everything in. At the foot of the garden a spouted 
barrel stood guard. It was filled with liquidy cow manure, the 
finest garden fertilizer. Also in that lower part of the garden 
were the square wooden frames he had built with his own 
hands, the sticks cross-tied with thick white string. Over these 
frames crawled the tomato vines. 

The Don hastened to water his garden. It must be done be- 
fore the sun waxed too hot and turned the water into a prism 
of fire that could burn his lettuce leaves like paper. Sun was 
more important than water, water also was important; but the 
two, imprudently mixed, could cause great misfortune. 

The Don moved through his garden hunting for ants. If ants 
were present, it meant that lice were in his vegetables and the 
ants were going after the lice and he would have to spray. 

He had watered just in time. The sun was becoming hot and 
the Don thought, ‘Prudence. Prudence. ’ But there were just a 
few more plants to be supported by sticks and he bent down 
again. He would go back into the house when he finished this 
last row. 

Quite suddenly it felt as if the sun had come down very close 
to his head. The air was filled with dancing golden specks. 
Michael’s oldest boy came running through the garden to- 
wards where the Don knelt and the boy was enveloped by a 
yellow shield of blinding light. But the Don was not to be 
tricked, he was too old a hand. Death hid behind that flaming 
yellow shield ready to pounce out on him and the Don with a 
wave of his hand warned the boy away from his presence. Just 
in time. The sledgehammer blow Inside his chest made him 
choke for air. The Don pitched forward into the earth. 

The boy raced away to call his father. Michael Corleone and 
some men at the maU gate ran to the garden and found the Don 



lying prone, clutching handfuls of earth. They lifted the Don 
up and carried him to the shade of his stone-flagged pado. 
Michael knelt beside his father, holding his hand, while the 
other men called for an ambulance and doctor. 

With a great effort the Don opened his eyes to see his son 
once more. The massive heart attack had turned his ruddy 
face almost blue. He was in extremis. He smelled the garden, 
the yellow shield of light smote his eyes, and he whispered, 
‘ Life is so beautiful. ’ 

He was spared the sight of his womcn^s tears, dying before 
they came back from church, dying before the ambulance 
arrived, or the doctor. He died surrounded by men, holding 
the hand of the son he had most loved. 

The funeral was royal. The Five Families sent their Dons 
and caporegimes^ as did the Tessio and Qemenaa Families. 
Johnny Fontane made the tabloid headlines by attending the 
funeral despite the advice of Michael not to appear. Fontane 
gave a statement to the newspapers that Vito Corleone was his 
Godfather and the finest man he had ever known and that he 
was honoured to be permitted to pay his last respects to such 
a man and didn’t give a damn who knew it. 

The wake was held in the house of the mall, in the old- 
fashioned style. Amerigo Bonasera had never done finer work, 
had discharged all obligations, by preparing his old friend and 
Godfather as lovingly as a mother prepares a bride for her 
wedding. Everyone commented on how not even death itself 
had been able to erase the nobility and the dignity of the great 
Don’s countenance and such remarks made Amerigo Bonasera 
fill with knowing pride, a curious sense of power. Only he 
knew what a terrible massacre death had perpetrated on the 
Don’s appearance. 

All the old friends and servitors came. Nazorine, his wife, 
his daughter and her husband and their children, Lucy Man- 
cini came with Freddie from Las Vegas. Tom Hagen and his 
wife and children, the Dons from San Francisco and Los 
Angeles, Boston and Qeveland. Rocco Lampone and Albert 
Neri were pallbearers with Qemenza and Tessio and, of course, 
the sons of the Don. The mall and all its houses were filled with 
floral wreaths. 


412 



Outside the gates of the mall were the newspapermen and 
photographers and a small truck that was known to contain 
FBI men with their movie cameras recording this epic. Some 
newspapermen who tried to crash the funeral inside found that 
the gate and fence were manned with security guards who 
demanded identification and an invitation card. And though 
they were treated with the utmost courtesy, refreshments sent 
out to them, they were not permitted inside. They tried to 
speak with some of the people coming out but were met with 
stony stares and not a syllable. 

Michael Corleone spent most of the day in the corner library 
room with Kay, Tom Hagen, and Freddie. People were ushered 
in to see him, to offer their condolences. Michael received them 
with all courtesy even when some of them addressed him as 
Godfather, or Don Michael, only Kay noticing his lips tighten 
with displeasure. 

Clemenza and Tessio came to join this inner circle and 
Michael personally served them with a drink. There was some 
gossip of business. Michael informed them that the mall and 
all its houses were to be sold to a development and construc- 
tion company. At an enormous profit, stiU another proof of the 
great Don’s genius. 

They all understood that now the whole empire would be in 
the West. That the Corleone Family would liquidate its power 
in New York. Such action had been awaiting the retirement or 
death of the Don. 

It was nearly ten years since there had been such a celebra- 
tion of people in this house, nearly ten years since the wedding 
of Constanzia Corleone and Carlo Rizzi, so somebody said. 
Michael walked to the window that looked out on the garden. 
That long time ago he had sat in the garden with Kay never 
dreaming that so curious a destiny was to be his. And his 
father dying had said, ‘ Life is so beautiful. ’ Michael could never 
remember l^s father ever having uttered a word about death, 
as if the Don respected death too much to philosophize about 
it. 

It was time for the cemetery. It was time to bury the great 
Don. Michael linked his arm with Kay’s and went out into the 
garden to join the host of mourners. Behind him came the 


413 



caporegjimis followed by their soldiers and then all the humble 
people the Godfather had blessed during his lifetime. The 
baker Na2orinc, the widow Colombo and her sons and all the 
countless others of his world he had ruled so firmly but justly. 
There were even some who had been his enemies, come to do 
him honour. 

Michael observed all this with a tight, polite smile. He was 
not impressed. Yet, he thought, if I can die saying, Xife is so 
beautiful,’ then nothing else is important. If I can believe in 
myself that much, nothing else matters. He would follow his 
father. He would care for his children, liis family, his world. 
But his children would grow in a dilFerent world. They would 
be doctors, artists, scientists. Governors. Presidents. Anything 
at all. He would see to it that they joined the general family of 
humanity, but he, as a powerful and prudent parent would 
most certainly keep a waty eye on that general family. 

On the morning after the funeral, all the most important 
officials of the Corleonc Family assembled on the mall. Shortly 
before noon they were admitted into the empty house of the 
Don* Michael Corleone received them. 

They almost filled the corner library room. There were the 
two caporegimes^ Clemcnza and Tessio; Rocco Lampone, with 
his reasonable, competent air; Carlo Rizzi, very quiet, very 
much knowing liis place; Tom Hagen, forsaking his strictly 
legal role to rally around in this crisis ; Albert Ncri, trying to 
stay physically dose to Michael, lighting his new Don’s dgar> 
ette, mixing his drink, all to show an unswerving loyalty de- 
spite the recent disaster to the Corleone Family. 

'J'he death of the Don was a great misfortune for the Family. 
Without him it seemed that half their strength was gone and 
almost all their bargaining power against the Barzini-Tattaglia 
alliance. Everyone in the room knew this and they waited for 
what Michael would say. In their eyes he was not yet the new 
Don; he had not earned the position or the title. If the God- 
fiither had lived, he might have assured his son's succession; 
now it was by no means certain. 

Michael waited until Neri had served drinks. Then he said 
quietly, ^I just want to tell everybody here that I understand 


414 



how they feel. I know you all respected my father, but now 
you have to worry about yourselves and your families. Some 
of you wonder how what happened is going to affect the 
planning we’ve done and the promises I made. Well, the 
answer to that is: nothing. Everything goes on as before.’ 

Qememca shook his great shaggy buffalo head. His hair was 
an iron grey and his features more deeply embedded in added 
layers of fat, were unpleasant. ‘The Barzinis and Tattaglias are 
going to move in on us real hard, Mike. You gotta fight or 
have a “sit-down” with them.* Everyone in the room noticed 
that Clemenza had not used a formal form of address to 
Michael, much less the title of Don. 

‘Let’s wait and see what happens,’ Michael said. ‘Let them 
break the peace first.’ 

Tessio spoke up in his soft voice. ‘They already have Mike. 
They opened up two “books ” in Brooklyn this morning. I got 
the word from the police captain who runs the protection list 
at the station house. In a month I won’t have a place to hang 
my hat in all Brooklyn.’ 

Michael stared at him thoughtfully. ‘Have you done any- 
thing about it?* 

Tessio shook his small, ferretlike head. ‘No,’ he said. ‘I 
didn’t want to give you any problems.’ 

‘Good,’ Michael said. ‘Just sit tight. And I guess that’s what 
I want to say to aU of you. Just sit tight. Don’t react to any 
provocation. Give me a few weeks to straighten things out, 
to see which way the wind is going to blow. Then I’ll make 
the best deal I can for everybody here. Then we’ll have a final 
meeting and make some final decisions.’ 

He ignored their 8urpri.se and Albert Neri started ushering 
them out. Michael said sharply, ‘Tom, stick around a few 
minutes.’ 

Hagen went to the window that faced the mall. He waited 
until he saw the caporegimes and Carlo Rizzi and Rocco Lam- 
ponc being shepherded through the guarded gate by Neri. 
Then he turned to Michael and said, ‘Have you got all the 
political connexions wired into you?’ 

Michael shook his head regretfully. ‘Not aU. I needed about 
four more months. The Don and I were working on it. But 


4*5 



Tvc got all the judges, we did that first, and some of the more 
important people in Congress. And the big party boys hete in 
New York were no problem, of course, llie Corleone Family 
is a lot stronger than anybody thinks, but I hoped to make it 
foolproof.’ He smiled at Hagen. *I guess you’ve figured every- 
thing out by now.’ 

Hagen nodded. ‘It wasn’t hard. Except why you wanted me 
out of the action. But I put on my Sicilian hat and 1 finally 
figured that too.’ 

Michael laughed. ‘The old man said you would. But that’s a 
luxury I can’t afford any more. I need you here. At least for the 
next few weeks. You better phone Vegas and talk to your wife. 
Just tell her a few weeks.’ 

Hagen said musingly, ’‘How do you think they’ll come at 
you?’ 

Michael sighed. ‘The Don instructed me. Through some- 
body close. Barzini will set me up through somebody dose 
that, supposedly, I won’t suspect.’ 

Hagen smiled at him. ‘ Somebody like me.’ 

Michael smiled back. ‘You’re Irish, they won’t trust you.’ 

‘I’m German- American,’ Hagen said. 

‘To them that’s Irish,* Michael said. ‘They won’t go to you 
and they won’t go to Neri because Neri was a cop. Plus both 
of you arc too close to me. They can’t take that gamble. Rocco 
Lamponc isn’t close enough. No, it will be Clemcnza, Tessio, 
or Carlo Rixzi.’ 

Hagen said softly, ‘I’m betting it’s Carlo.’ 

‘We’ll sec,’ Michael said. ‘It won’t be long.’ 

It was the next morning, while Hagen and Michael were 
having breakfast together. Michael took a phone call in the 
library, and when he came back to the kitchen, he said to 
Hagen, ‘ It’s all set up. I’m going to meet Barzini a week from 
now. To make a new peace now that the Don is dead.’ Michael 
laughed. 

Hagen asked, ‘Who phoned you, who made the contact?’ 
They both knew that whoever in the Corleone Family had 
made the contact had turned traitor. 

Michael gave Hagen a sad regretful smile. ‘Tessio,’ he said. 

416 



They ate the test of their breakfast in silence. Over coffee 
Hagen shook his head. could have sworn it would have been 
Carlo or maybe Oemenza. 1 never £gured Tcssio. He*s the 
best of the lot.’ 

‘He’s the most intelligent,’ Michael said. ‘And he did what 
seems to him to be the smart thing. He sets me up for the hit 
by Bartini and inherits the Corlcone Family. He sticks with me 
and he gets wiped out; he’s figuring I can’t win.’ 

Hagen paused before he asked reluctantly, ‘ How right is he 
figuring?’ 

Michael shrugged. ‘It looks bad. But my father was the only 
one who understood that political connexions and power arc 
worth ten regimes. I think I’ve got most of my father’s political 
power in my hands now, but I’m the only one who really knows 
that.* He smiled at Hagen, a reassuring smile. ‘I’ll make them 
call me Don. But I feel lousy about Tessio.* 

Hagen said, ‘Have you agreed to the meeting with Barzini?’ 

‘Yeah,’ Michael said. ‘A week from tonight. In Brooklyn, 
on Tessio’s ground where I’ll be safe.’ He laughed again. 

Hagen said, ‘Be careful before then.’ 

For the first time Michael was cold with Hagen. * I don’t need 
a Consigliori to give me that kind of advice,’ he said. 

During the week preceding the peace meeting between the 
Corieone and Barzini Families, Michael showed Hagen just 
how careful he could be. He never set foot outside the mall 
and never received anyone without Neri beside him. There was 
only one annoying complication. Connie and Carlo’s oldest 
boy was to receive his Confirmation in the Catholic Church 
and Kay asked Michael to be the Godfather. Michael refused. 

‘I don’t often beg you,’ Kay said. ‘Please do this just for me. 
Connie wants it so much. And so does Carlo. It’s yery impor- 
tant to them. Please, Michael.’ 

She could see he was angry with her for insisting and ex- 
pected him to refuse. So she was surprised when he nodded and 
said, ‘OK. But I can’t leave the mall. Tell them to arrange for 
the priest to confirm the kid here. I’ll pay whatever it costs. If 
they run into trouble with the church people, Hagen will 
straighten it out.’ 


417 


Godfather— i— ] 4 



And so the day before the meeting with the Barzini Family, 
Michael Corlcone stood Godfather to the son of Girlo and 
Connie Rizzi. He presented the boy with an extremely ex- 
pensive wfistwatch and gold band. There was a small party in 
Carlo’s house, to which were invited the caporegimes^ Hagen, 
Lampune, and everyone who lived on the niall, including, of 
course, the Don’s widow. Connie was so overcome with 
emotion that she hugged and kissed her brother and Kay all 
during the evening. And even Carlo Rizzi became sentimental, 
wringing Michael’s hand and calling him Godfather at every 
excuse ~ old country style. Michael himself had never been so 
affable, so outgoing. Connie whispered to Kay, ‘I think Carlo 
and Mike are going to be real friends now. Something like this 
always brings people together.’ 

Kay squeezed her sister-in-law’s arm. *l’m so glad,’ she said. 


418 



Book VIII 


CHAPTER THIRTY 

Albert Neri sat in his Bronx apartment and carefully 
brushed the blue serge of his old policeman^s uniform. He 
unpinned the badge and set it on the table to be polished. The 
regulation holster and gun were draped over a chair. This 
old routine of detail made him happy in some strange way, 
one of the few times he had felt happy since his wife had left 
him, nearly two years ago. 

He had married Rita when she was a high school kid and he 
was a rookie policeman. She was shy, dark-haired, from a 
straitlaced Italian family who never let her stay out later than 
ten o’clock at night. Neri was completely in love with her, 
her innocence, her virtue, as well as her dark prettiness. 

At first Rita Neri was fascinated by her husband. He was im- 
mensely strong and she could see people were afraid of him 
beotuse of that strength and his unbending attitude towards 
what was right and wrong. He was rarely tactful. If he dis- 
agreed with a group’s attitude or an individual’s opinion, he 
kept his mouth shut or brutally spoke his contradiction. He 
never gave a polite agreement. He also had a true Sicilian 
temper and his rages could be awesome. But he was never 
angry with his wife. 

Neri in the space of five years became one of the most feared 
policemen on the New York Qty force. Also one of the most 
honest. But he had his own ways of enforcing the law. He 
hated punks and when he saw a bunch of young rowdies 
making a disturbance on a street comer at night, ^sturbing 
passersby, he took quick and decisive action. He employed a 
physical strength that was truly extraordinary, which he him- 
self did not fully appreciate. 

One night in Central Park West he jumped out of the patrol 
car and lined up six punks in black silk jackets. His partner 


419 



remained in the driver’s seat, not wanting to get involved, 
knowing Neri. The six boys, all in their late teens, had been 
stopping people and asking them for cigarettes in a youth- 
fully menacing way but not doing anyone any real physical 
harm. They had also teased girls going by with a sexual gesture 
more French than American. 

Neri lined them up against the stone wall that closed off 
Central Park from Eighth Avenue. It was twilight, but Neri 
carried his favourite weapon, a huge flashlight. He never 
bothered drawing his gun; it was never necessary. His face 
when he was angry was so brutally menacing, combined with 
his uniform, that the usual punks were cowed. These were no 
exception. 

Neri asked the first youth in the black silk jacket, ‘What’s 
your name?’ The kid answered with an Irish name. Neri told 
him, * Get off the street. I sec you again tonight I’ll crucify you.’ 
He motioned with his flashlight and the youth walked quickly 
away. Neri followed the same procedure with the next two 
boys. He let them walk off. But the fourth boy gave an Italian 
name and smiled at Neri as if to claim some sort of kinship. 
Neri was unmistakably of Italian descent. Neri looked at this 
youth for a moment and asked superfluously, ‘You Italian?’ 
The boy grinned confidently. 

Neri hit him a stunning blow on the forehead with his 
flashlight. The boy dropped to his knees. The skin and flesh 
of his forehead had cracked open and blood poured down his 
face. But it was strictly a flesh wound. Neri said to him 
harshly, ‘You son of a bitch, you’re a disgrace to the Italians. 
You give us all a bad name. Get on your feet.’ He gave the 
yohth a kick in the side, not gently, not too hard. ‘Get home 
and stay off the street. Don’t ever let me catch you wearing 
that jacket again either. I’ll send you to the hospital. Now get 
home. You’re lucky I’m not your father.’ 

Neri didn’t bother with the other two punks. He just booted 
their asses down the Avenue, telling them he didn’t want them 
on the street jthat night. 

In such encounters all was done so quickly that there was no 
time for a crowd to gather or for someone to protest his 
actons. Neri would get into the patrol car and his partner 

4X0 



would zoom it away. Of course once in a while there would 
be a real hard case who wanted to fight and might even pull a 
knife. These were truly unfortunate people. Neri would, with 
awesome ferocity, beat them bloody and throw them into the 
patrol car. They would be put under arrest and charged with 
assaulting an officer. But usually their case would have to wait 
until they were discharged from the hospital. 

Eventually Neri was transferred to the beat that held the 
United Nations building area, mainly because he had not shown 
his precinct sergeant the proper respect. The United Nations 
people with their diplomatic immunity parked their limousines 
all over the streets, without regard to police regulations. Neri 
complained to the precinct and was told not to make waves, 
to just ignore it. But one night there was a whole side street 
that was impassable because of the carelessly parked autos. It 
was after midnight, so Neri took his huge Rashlight from the 
patrol car and went down the street smashing windshields to 
smithereens. It was not easy, even for high-ranking diplomats, 
to get the windshields repaired in less than a few days. Pro- 
tests poured into the police prednet station house demanding 
protection against this vandalism. After a week of windshield 
smashing the truth gradually hit somebody about what was 
actually happening and Albert Neri was transferred to Harlem. 

One Sunday shortly afterwards, Neri took his wife to visit 
his widowed sister in Brooklyn. Albert Neri had the fierce 
protective affection for his sister common to all Sicilians and 
he always visited her at least once every couple of months to 
make sure she was all right. She was much older than he was 
and had a son who was twenty. This son, Thomas, without a 
father’s hand, t^^as giving trouble. He had got into a few minor 
scrapes, was running a little wild. Neri had once used bis con- 
tacts on the police force to keep the youth from being charged 
with larceny. On that occasion he had kept his anger in check 
but had given his nephew warning. ‘Tommy, you make my 
sister cry over you and I’ll straighten you out myself.’ It was 
Intended as a friendly pally-uncle warning, not really as a 
threat. But even though Tommy was the toughest kid in that 
tough Brooklyn neighbourhood, he was afraid of his Uncle Al. 

On this particular visit Tommy had come in very late 


421 



Saturday night and was still sleeping in his room. His mother 
went to wake him, telling him to get dressed so that he could 
eat Sunday dinner with his unde and aunt. The boy’s voice 
came harshly through the partly opened door, *1 don’t give a 
shit, let me sleep,’ and his mother came back out into the 
kitchen smiling apologetically. 

So they had to eat their dWer without him. Neri asked his 
sister if Tommy was giving her any real trouble and she shook 
her head. 

Neri and his wife were about to leave when Tommy finally 
got up. He hardy grumbled a hello and went into the kitchen. 
Finally he yelled in to his mother, *Hey, Ma, how about cook- 
ing me something to eat?* But it was not a request. It was the 
spoiled complaint of an indulged child. 

His mother said shrilly, ’Get up when it’s dinnertime and 
then you can cat. I’m not going to cook again for you.’ 

It was the sort of little ugly scene that was fairly common- 
place, but Tommy still a little irritable from his slumber made 
a mistake. ’Ah, fiick you and your nagging, I’ll go out and 
eat.’ As soon as he said it he regretted it. 

His Unde A1 was on him like a cat on a mouse. Not so much 
for the insult to his sister this particular day but because it was 
obvious that he often talked to his mother in such a fiishion 
when they were alone. Tommy never dared say such a thing 
in front of her brother. This particular Sunday he had just 
been careless. To his misfortune. 

Before the frightened eyes of the two women, A1 Neri gave 
his nephew a merciless, careful, physical beating. At first the 
youth made an attempt at sdf-ddence but soon gave that up 
and begged for mercy. Neri slapped his face until the lips were 
swollen and bloody. He rocked the kid’s head back and slam- 
med him against the wall. He punched him in the stomach, 
then got him prone on the floor and slapped his face into the 
carpet. He told the two women to wait and made Tommy go 
down the street and get into his car. There he put the fear of 
God into him. ’If my sister ever tells me you talk like that to 
her again, this beating will seem like kisses from a broad,’ he 
tqld Tommy. ’I want to see you straighten out. Now go up the 
house and teU my wife I’m waiting for her.’ 


4Z1 



It was two months after this that Ai Neri got back from a 
late shift on the force and found his wife had left him. She had 
packed all her clothes and gone back to her family. Her father 
told him that Rita was afraid of him> that she was afraid to live 
with him because of his temper. Al was stunned with disbelief. 
He had never struck his wife, never threatened her in any way, 
had never felt anything but affection for her. But he was so 
bewildered by her action that he decided to let a few days go 
by before he went over to her family’s house to talk to her. 

It was unfortunate that the next night he ran into trouble on 
his shift. His car answered a call in Harlem, a report of a deadly 
assault. As usual Neri jumped out of the patrol car while it was 
still rolling to a stop. It was after midnight and he was carrying 
his huge flashlight. It was easy spotting the trouble. There was a 
crowd gathered outside a tenement doorway. One Negro woman 
said to Neri, 'There’s a man in there cutting a little girl.’ 

Neri went into the hallway. There was an open door at the 
far end with light streaming out and he could hear moaning. 
Still handling the flashlight, he went down the hall and through 
the open doorway. 

He almost fell over two bodies stretched out on the floor. 
One was a Negro woman of about twenty-five. The other was 
a Negro girl of no more than twelve. Both were bloody from 
razor cuts on their faces and bodies. In the living room Neri 
saw the man who was responsible. He knew him well. 

The man was Wax Baines, a notorious pimp, dope pusher, 
and strong-arm artist. His eyes were popping from drugs now, 
the bloody knife he held in his hand wavered. Neri had 
arrested him two weeks before for severely assaulting one of 
his whores in the street. Baines had told him, 'Hey, man, this 
none of your business.’ And Neri’s partner had also said some- 
thing about letting the niggers cut each other up if they wanted 
to, but Neri had hauled Baines into the station house. Baines 
was bailed out the very next day. 

Neri had never much liked Negroes, and working in Harlem 
had made him like them even less. They all were on drugs or 
booze while they let their women work or peddle ass. He 
didn’t have any use for any of the bastards. So Baines’ brazen 
breaking of the bw infuriated him. And the sight of the little 



gitl all cut up with the tazor sickened him. Quite coolly, in his 
own mind, he decided not to bring Baines in. 

But witnesses were already crowding into the apartment be- 
hind him, some people who lived in the building and his 
partner from the patrol car. 

Neri ordered Baines, ‘ Drop your knife, you’re under arrest.’ 

Baines laughed. *Man, you gotta use your gun to arrest me.’ 
He held his knife up. * Or maybe you want this.’ 

Neri moved very quickly, so his partner would not have 
time to draw a gun. The Negro stabbed with his knife, but 
Neri’s extraordinary reflexes enabled him to catch the thrust 
with his left palm. With his right hand he swung the flashlight 
in a short vicious arc. The blow caught Baines on the side of 
the head and made his knees buckle comically like a drunk’s. 
The knife dropped from his hand. He was quite helpless. So 
Neri’s second blow was inexcusable, as the police depart- 
mental hearing and his criminal trial later proved with the help 
of the testimony of witnesses and his fellow policeman. Neri 
brought the flashlight down on the top of Baines* skull in an 
incredibly powerful blow which shattered the glass of the 
flashlight; the enamel shield and the bulb itself popping out 
and flying across the room. The heavy aluminium barrel of the 
flashlight tube bent and only the batteries inside prevented it 
from doubling on itself. One awed onlooker, a Negro man 
who lived in the tenement and later testified against Neri, said, 
*Man, that’s a hard-headed nigger.’ 

But Baines’ head was not quite hard enough. The blow caved 
in his skull. He died two hours later in the Harlem Hospital. 

Albert Neri was the only one surprised when he was brought 
up on departmental charges for using excessive force. He was 
suspended and criminal charges were brought against him. 
He was indicted for manslaughter, convicted, and sentenced 
to from one to ten years in prison. By this time he was so filled 
with a baffled rage and hatred of all society that he didn’t give 
a damn. That they dared to judge him a criminall That they 
dared to send him to prison for kifling an animal like that pimp- 
nigger I That they didn’t give a damn for the woman and litde 
girl who had been carved up, disfigured for life, and still in the 
hospital. 


4M 



He did nor fear prison. He felt that because of his having 
been a policeman and especially because of the nature of his 
offence, he would be well taken care of. Several of his buddy 
ofHcers had already assured him they would speak to friends. 
Only his wife’s father, a shrewd old-style It'alian who owned a 
fish market in the Bronx, realized that a man like Albert Neri 
had little chance of surviving a year in prison. One of his 
fellow inmates might kill him; if not, he was almost certain 
to kill one of them. Out of guilt that his daughter had deserted 
a fine husband for some womanly foolishness, Neri’s father-in- 
law used his contacts with the Corleone Family (he paid pro- 
tection money to one of its representatives and supplied the 
Corleone Family itself with the finest fish available, as a gift), 
he petitioned for their intercession. 

The Corleone Family knew about Albert Neri. He was 
something of a legend as a legitimately tough cop; he had made 
a certain reputation as a man not •'^o be held lightly, as a man 
who could inspire fear out of his own person regardless of the 
uniform and the sanctioned gun he wore. The Corleone Family 
was always interested in such men. The fact that he was a 
policeman did not mean too much. Many young men started 
down a fdse path to their true destiny. Time and fortune 
usually set them aright. 

It was Pete Qemenza, with his fine nose for good personnel, 
who brought the Neri afiair to Tom Hagen’s attention. Hagen 
studied the copy of the official police dossier and listened to 
Qemenza. He said, * Maybe we have another Luca Brasi here.* 

Qemenza nodded his head vigorously. Though he was very 
fat, his face had none of the usi^ stout man’s benignity. ‘My 
thinking exactly. Mike should look into this himself.’ 

And so it was that before Albert Neri was transferred from 
the temporary jail to what would have been his permanent 
residence upstate, he was informed that the judge had recon- 
sidered his case on the basis of new information and affidavits 
submitted by high police officials. His sentence was suspended 
and he was released. 

Albert Neri was no fool and his fiither-in-law no shrinking 
violet. Neri learned what had happened and paid his debt to 
the £athee-m-law by agreeing to get a divorce horn Rita. Then 



he made a trip out to Long Beach to thank his benefactor. 
Arrangements had been made beforehand, of course. Michael 
received him in his library. 

Neri stated his thanks in formal tones and was surprised and 
gratified by the warmth with which Michael received his 
thanks. 

‘Hell, I couldn’t let them do that to a fellow Sicilian,* 
Michael said. ‘They should have given you a goddamn medal. 
But those damn politicians don’t give a shit about anything 
except pressure groups. Listen, I would never have stepped 
into the picture if I hadn’t checked everything out and saw 
what a raw deal you got. One of my people talked to your sister 
and she told us how you were always worried about her and 
her kid, how you straightened the kid out, kept him from 
going bad. Your father-in-law says you’re the finest feUow in 
the world. That’s rare.’ Tactfully Michael did not mention 
anything about Neri’s wife having left him. 

They chatted for a while. Neri had always been a taciturn 
man, but he found himself opening up to Michael Corleone. 
Michael was only about five years his senior, but Neri spoke 
to him as if he were much older, old enough to be his father. 

Finally Michael said, ‘There’s no sense getting you out of 
jail and ^en just leaving you high and dry. I can arrange some 
work for you. I have interests out in Las Vegas, wi^ your 
experience you could be a hotel security man. Or if there’s 
some little business you’d like to go into, I can put a word in 
with the banks to advance you a loan for capital.’ 

Neri was overcome with grateful embarrassment. He proudly 
refused and then added, ‘ 1 have to stay under the jurisdiction 
of the court anyway with the suspended sentence.’ 

Michael said briskly, ‘That’s all crap detail, I can fix that. 
Forget about that supervision and just so the banks won’t get 
choosy rU have your yellow sheet puDed.’ 

The yellow sheet was a police record of criminal ofienccs 
committed by any individual. It was usually submitted to a 
judge when he was considering what sentence to give a con- 
victed criminal. Neri had been long enough on the police 
force to know that many hoodlums going up for sentencing 
had been treated leniently by the judge because a clean yellow 

426 



sheet had been submitted by the bribed Police Records De- 
partment. So he was not too surprised that Michael Corleone 
could do such a thing; he was, however, surprised that such 
trouble would be taken on his account. 

*If I need help. I'll get in touch,' Neri said. 

*Good, good,' Michael said. He looked at his watch and 
Neri took this for his dismissal. He rose to go. Again he was 
surprised. 

‘Lunchtime,' Michael said. ‘Come on and cat with me and 
my family. My father said he'd like to meet you. We’ll walk 
over to his house. My mother should have some fried peppers 
and eggs and sausages. Real Sicilian style.’ 

That afternoon was the most agreeable Albert Neri had 
spent since he was a small boy, since the days before his parents 
had died when he was only fifteen. Don Corleone was at his 
most amiable and was delighted when he discovered that Neri’s 
parents had originally come from a small village only a few 
minutes from his own. The talk was good, the food was 
delicious, the wine robustly red, Neri was struck by the thought 
that he was finally with his own true people. He understood 
that he was only a casual guest but he knew he could find a 
permanent place and be happy in such a world. 

Michael and the Don w^ked him out to his car. The Don 
shook his hand and said, ‘ You're a fine fellow. My son Michael 
here, I’ve been teaching him the olive oil business. I’m getting 
old, I want to retire. And he comes to me and he says he wants 
to interfere in your little affair. I teU him to just learn about the 
olive oil. But he won’t leave me alone. He says^ here is this 
fine fellow, a Sicilian, and they are doing this dirty trick to him. 
He kept on, he gave me no peace until I interested myself in 
it. 1 1^ you this to tell you that he was right. Now that I've 
met you, I’m glad we took the trouble. So if we ran do any- 
thing further for you, just ask the favour. Understand? We're 
at your service.' (Remembering the Don's kindness, Neri 
wished the great man was still alive to see the service that 
would be done this day.) 

It took Neri less than three days to make up his mind. He 
understood he was being courted but understood more. That 
the Corleone Family approved that act of his which society 


4*7 



condemned and had punished him for. The Corleone Family 
valued him» society did not. He understood that he would be 
happier in the world the Corleoncs had created than in the 
world outside. And he understood that the Corleone Family 
was the more powerful, within its narrower limits. 

He visited Michael again and put his cards on the table. He 
did not want to work in Vcga| but he would take a job with 
the Family in New York. He made his loyalty clear. Michael 
was touched, Neri could see that. It was arranged. But Michael 
insisted that Neri take a vacation first, down in Miami at the 
Family hotel there, all expenses paid and a month’s salary in 
advance so he could have the necessary cash to enjoy himself 
properly. 

That vacation was Neri’s first taste of luxury. People at the 
hotel took special care of him, saying, ‘Ah, you’re a friend of 
Michael Corleone.’ The word had been passed along. He was 
given one of the plush suites, not the grudging small room a 
poor relation might be fobbed off with. The man running the 
nightclub in the hotel fixed him up with some beautiful girls. 
When Neri got back to New York he had a slightly different 
view on life in general. 

He was put in the Clemenza regime and tested carefully by 
that masterful personnel man. Certain precautions had to be 
taken. He had, after all, once been a policeman. But Neri’s 
natural ferocity overcame whatever scruples he might have 
had at being on the other side of the fence. In less than a year 
he had ‘made his bones’. He could never turn back. 

Clemenza sang his praises. Neri was a wonder, the new 
Luca Brasi. He would be better than Luca, Clemenza bragged. 
After all, Neri was his discovery. Physically the man was a 
marvel. His reflexes and coordination such that he could have 
been another Joe DiMaggio. Clemenza also knew that Neri 
was not a man to be controlled by someone like himself. Neri 
was made directly responsible to Michael Corleone, with Tom 
Hagen as the necessary buffer. He was a ‘special’ and as such 
commanded a high salary but did not have his own living, a 
bookmaking or strong-arm operation. It was obvious that his 
respect for Michael Corleone was enormous and one day Hagen 
said jokingly to Michael, ‘Well now you’ve got your Luca.’ 

428 



Michael nodded. He had brought it off. Albert Neri was his 
man to the death. And of course it was a trick learned from the 
Don himself. While learning the business, undergoing the 
long days of tutelage by his father, Michael had one time asked, 
‘How come you used a guy like Luca Brasi? An animal like 
that?' 

The Don had proceeded to instruct him. ‘There arc men in 
this world/ he said, ‘who go about demanding to be killed. 
You must have noticed them. They quarrel in gambling games, 
they jump out of their automobiles in a rage if someone so 
much as scratches their fender, they humiliate and bully people 
whose capabilities they do not know. I have seen a man, a fool, 
deliberately infuriate a group of dangerous men, and he him- 
self without any resources. These are people who wander 
through the world shouting, “Kill me. Kill me. " And there is 
always somebody ready to oblige them. We read about it in the 
newspapers every day. Such people of course do a great deal 
of harm to others also. 

‘Luca Brasi was such a man. But he was such an extra- 
ordinary man that for a long time nobody could kill him. Most 
of these people are of no concern to ourselves but a Brasi is a 
powerful weapon to be used. The trick is that since he does 
not fear death and indeed looks for it, then the trick is to make 
yourself the only person in the world that he truly desires w/ 
to loll him. He has only that one fear, not of death, but that 
jou may be the one to kill him. He is yours then.' 

It was one of the most valuable lessons given by the Don 
before he died, and Michael had used it to make Neri his Luca 
Brasi. 

And now, finally, Albert Neri, alone in his Bronx apartment, 
was going to put on his police uniform again. He brushed it 
carefully. Polishing the holster would be next. And his police- 
man’s cap too, the visor had to be cleaned, the stout black 
shoes shined. Neri worked with a will. He had found his place 
in the world, Michael Corleone had placed his absolute trust 
in him, and today he would not fail that trust. 



CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE 


On that same day two limousines parked on the ‘Long 
Beach mall. One of the big cars waited to take Connie Cor- 
leone, her mother, her husband, and her two children, to the 
airport. The Carlo Rizzi Family was to take a vacation in Las 
Vegas in preparation for their permanent move to that city. 
Michael had given Carlo the order, over Connie’s protests. 
Michael had not bothered to explain that he wanted everyone 
out of the mall before the Corleone-Barzini Families* meeting. 
Indeed the meeting itself vras top secret. The only ones who 
knew about it were the capos of the Family. 

The other limousine was for Kay and her children, who were 
being driven up to New Hampshire for a visit with her parents. 
Michael would have to stay in the mall; he had aii^s too 
pressing to leave. 

The night before Michael had also sent word to Carlo Rizzi 
that he would require his presence on the mall for a few days, 
that he could join his wife and children later that week. Connie 
had been furious. She had tried to get Michael on the phone, 
but he had gone into the city. Now her eyes were searching the 
mall for him, but he was closeted with Tom Hagen and not to 
be disturbed. Connie kissed Carlo goodbye when he put her in 
the limousine. ‘If you don’t come out there in two days, 1*11 
come back to get you,’ she threatened him. 

He gave her a polite husbandly smile of sexual complicity. 
‘I’ll be there,* he said. 

She hung out the window. ‘What do you think Michael 
wants you for?* she asked. Her worried frown made her look 
old and unattractive. 

Carlo shrugged. ‘He’s been promising me a big deal. Maybe 
that’s what he wants to talk about. That’s what he hinted any- 
way.’ Carlo did not know of the meeting scheduled with the 
Barzini Family for that night. 

Connie said eagerly, ‘Really, Carlo?’ 


430 



Carlo nodded at her reassuringly. The limousine moved off 
through the gates of the mall. 

It was only after the first limousine had left that Michael 
appeared to say goodbye to Kay and his own two children. 
Carlo also came over and wished Kay a good trip and a good 
vacation. Finally the second limousine pulled away and went 
through the gate. 

Michael said, ‘I’m sorry I had to keep you here. Carlo. It 
won’t be more than a couple of days.' 

Carlo said qiiickly^ ‘I don't mind at all.* 

‘Good,* Michael said. ‘Just stay by your phone and I’ll 
you when I’m ready for you. I have to get some other dope 
before. OK?’ 

‘ Sure, Mike, sure,’ Carlo said. He went into his own house, 
made a phone call to the mistress he was discreetly keeping in 
Westbury, promising he would try to get to her late that night. 
Then he got set with a bottle of rye and waited. He waited a 
long time. Cars started coming through the gate shortly aftei 
noontime. He saw Clemenza get out of one, and then a little 
later Tessio came out of another. Both of them were admitted 
to Michael's house by one of the bodyguards. Qemenza left 
after a few hours, but Tessio did not reappear. 

Carlo took a breath of fresh air around the mall, not more 
then ten minutes. He was familiar with all the guards who 
pulled duty on the mall, was even friendly with some of them. 
He thought he might gossip a bit to pass the time. But to 
his surprise none of the guards today were men he knew. 
They were all strangers to him. Even more surprising, the 
man in charge at the gate was Rocco Lampone; and Carlo 
knew that Rocco was of too high a rank in the Family to be 
pulling auch menial duty unless something extraordinary was 
afoot. 

Rocco gave him a friendly smile and hello. Carlo was wary. 
Rocco said, ‘Hey, I thought you were going on vacation with 
the Don?’ 

Carlo shrugged. ‘MUke wanted me to stick around for a 
couple of days. He has something for me to do.’ 

‘Yeah,’ Rocco Lampone said. ‘Me too. Then he tells me to 
keep a check on the gate. Well, what the hell, he’s the boss.’ 


45 * 



His tone implied that Michael was not the man his father was 
a bit derogatory. 

Carlo ignored the tone, •Mike knows what he’s doing,’ he 
said. Rocco accepted the rebuke in silence. Carlo said so long 
and walked back to the house. Something was up, but Rocco 
didn’t know what it was. 

Michael stood in the window of his living room and 
watched Carlo strolling around the mall. Hagen brought him a 
drink, strong brandy. Michael sipped at it gratefully. Behind 
him, Hagen said, gently, 'Mike, you have to start moving. It’s 
time.’ 

Michael sighed. *1 wish it weren’t so soon. I wish the old 
man had lasted a little longer.’ 

‘Nothing will go wrong,’ Hagen said. ‘If I didn’t tumble, 
then nobody did. You set it up real good.* 

Michael turned away from the window. ‘The old man plan- 
ned a lot of it. I never realized how smart he was. But I guess 
you tenow.’ 

‘Nobody like him,’ Hagen said. ‘But this is beautiful. This 
is the best. So you can’t be too bad either.’ 

‘Let’s see what happens,’ Michael said. ‘Are Tessio and 
Clemenza on che mall?’ 

Hagen nodded. Michael finished the brandy in his glass. 

‘ Send Qemenza in to me. I’ll instruct him personally. I don’t 
want to sec Tessio at all. Just tell him I’ll be ready to go to the 
Barzini meeting with him in about a half hour. Clemenza’s 
people will take care of him after that.’ 

, Hagen said in a noncommittal voice, ‘There’s no way to let 
Tessio off the hook?’ 

‘No way,’ Michael said. 

Upstate in the city of Buffalo, a small pizza parlour on a side 
street was doing a rush trade. As the lunch hours passed, busi- 
ness finally slackened off and the counterman took his round 
tin tray with its few leftover slices out of the window and put 
it on the shelf of the huge brick oven. He peeked into the oven 
at a pie baking there. The cheese had not yet started to bubble. 
When he turned back to the counter that enabled him to serve 


45 ^ 



people in the street, there was a young, tough-looking man 
standing there. The man said, 'Gimme a slice/ 

The pi 22 a counterman took his wooden shovel and scooped 
one of the cold slices into the oven to warm it up. The cus- 
tomer, instead of waiting outside, decided to come through 
the door and be served. The store was empty now. The 
counterman opened the oven and took out the hot slice and 
served it on a paper plate. But the customer, instead of giving 
the money for it, was staring at him intently. 

'I hear you got a great tattoo on your chest,’ the customer 
said. '1 can set the top of it over your shirt, how about letting 
me see the rest of it?’ 

The counterman froze. He seemed to be paralysed. 

‘Open your shirt,’ the customer said. 

The counterman shook his head. ‘1 got no tattoo,* he said in 
heavily accented English. ‘ That’s the man who works at night.* 

The customer laughed. It was an unpleasant laugh, harsh, 
strained. ‘Come on, unbutton your shirt, let me see.’ 

The counterman started backing towards the rear of the 
store, aiming to edge around the huge oven. But the customer 
raised his hand above the counter. There was a gun in it. He 
fired. The bxiUet caught the counterman in the chest and 
hurled him against the oven. Hie customer fired into his body 
again and the counterman slumped to the floor. The customer 
came around the serving shelf, reached down and tipped the 
buttons off the shirt. The chest was covered with blood, but 
the tattoo was visible, the intertwined lovers and the knife 
transfixing them. The counterman raised one of his arms feebly 
as if to protect himself. The gunman said, ‘Fabr^io, Michad 
Corleone sends you his regards.’ He extended the gun so that 
it was only a few inches from the counterman’s skull and pulled 
the trigger. Then he walked out of the store. At the kerb a car 
was waiting for him with its door open. He jumped in and the 
car sped off. 

Rocco Lampone answered the phone installed on one of the 
iron pillars of the gate. He heard someone saying, ‘Your pack- 
age is ready,’ and the click as the caller hung up. Rocco got 
into his car and drove out of the mall. He crossed the Jones 


45J 



Beach Causeway, the same causeway on which Sonny Corleone 
had been killed, and drove out to the railroad station of Wan- 
tagh. He parked his car there. Another car was waiting for 
him with two men in it. They drove to a motel ten minutes 
further out on Sunrise Highway and turned into its courtyard, 
Rocco Lampone, leaving his two men in the car, went to one 
of the little chalet-type bungalows. One kick sent its door flying 
off its hinges and Rocco sprang into the room. 

Phillip Tattaglia, seventy years old and naked as a baby, 
stood over a bed on which lay a young girl. Phillip Tattaglia's 
thick head of hair was jet black, but the plumage of his crotch 
was steel grey. His body had the soft plumpness of a bird. 
Rocco pumped four bullets into him, all in the belly. Then he 
turned and ran back to the car. The two men dropped him off 
in the Wantagh station. He picked up his car and drove back 
to the mall. He went in to see Michael Corleone for a moment 
and then came out and took up his position at the gate. 

Albert Neri, alone in his apartment, flnished getting his 
uniform ready. Slowly he put it on, trousers, shirt, tie, and 
jacket, holster, and gunbelt. He had turned in his gun when he 
was suspended from the force, but, through some adminis- 
trative oversight they had not made him give up his shield. 
Clemenza had supplied him with a new .38 Police Special that 
could not be traced. Neri broke it down, oiled it, checked the 
hammer, put it together again, clicked the trigger. He loaded 
the cylinders and was set to go. 

He put the policeman’s cap in a heavy paper bag and then 
put a civilian overcoat on to cover his uniform. He checked 
his watch. Fifteen minutes before the car would be waiting 
for him downstairs. He spent the fifteen minutes checking 
himself in the mirror. There was no question. He looked like 
a real cop. 

The carwfji^s waiting with two of Rocco Lampone’s men in 
front. Neri got into the back seat. As the car started downtown, 
after they had left the neighbourhood of his apartment, he 
shrugged off the civilian overcoat and left it on the floor of the 
car. He ript^ed open the paper bag and put the police officer’s 
cap on his head. 


454 



At 55th Street and Fifth Avenue the car pulled over to the 
kerb and Neri got out. He started walking down the avenue. 
He had a queer feeling being back in uniform, patrolling the 
streets as he had done so many times. There were crowds of 
people. He walked downtown until he was in front of Rocke- 
feller Centre, across the way from St Patrick’s Cathedral. On 
his side of Fifth Avenue he spotted the limousine he was look- 
ing for. It was parked, nakedly alone between a whole string 
of red NO PARKING and no standing signs. Neri slowed 
his pace. He was too early. He stopped to write something in 
his summons book and then kept walking. He was abreast of 
the limousine. He tapped its fender with his nightstick. The 
driver looked up in surprise. Neri pointed to the no stand- 
ing sign with his stick and motioned the driver to move his 
car. The driver turned his head away. 

Neri walked out into the street so that he was standing by 
the driver’s open window. The driver was a tough-looking 
hood, just the kind he loved to break up. Neri said with 
deliberate insultingness, ‘OK, wise guy, you want me to stick 
a summons up your ass or do you wanta get moving?’ 

The driver said impassively, ‘You better check with your 
precinct. Just give me the ticket if it’ll make you feel happy.* 

‘Get the hell out of here,’ Neri said, ‘or I’ll drag you out of 
that car and break your ass.’ 

The driver made a ten-doliar bill appear by some sort of 
magic, folded it into a little square using just one band, and 
tried to shove it inside Ned’s blouse. Neri moved back on to 
the sidewalk and crooked his finger at the driver. The ddver 
came out of the car. 

‘Let me see your licence and registration,’ Neri said. He had 
been hoping to get the driver to go around the block but there 
was no hope for that now. Out of the corner of his eye, Neri 
saw three short, heavyset men coming down the steps of the 
Plaaa building, coming down towards the street. It was Barzini 
himself and his two bodyguards, on their way to meet hiichael 
Corleone. Even as he saw this, one of the bodyguards peeled 
off to come ahead and see what was wrong with Barzini’s 
car. 

This man asked the driver, ‘What’s up?’ 


435 



The driver said curdy, ^Tm getting a ticket, no sweat. This 
guy must be new in the precinct.* 

At that moment Barrini came up with his other bodyguard. 
Fc growled, ‘What the hell is wrong now?* 

Neri finished writing in his summons book and gave the 
driver back his registration and licence. Then he put his sum* 
mons book back in his hip pocket and with the forward 
motion of his hand drew the .58 Special. 

He put three bullets in Barzini’s bwirrel chest before the other 
three men unfroze enough to dive for cover. By that time Neri 
had darted into the crowd and around the corner where the car 
was waiting for him. The car sped up to Ninth Avenue and 
turned downtown. Near Chelsea Park, Neri, who had dis- 
carded the cap and put on the overcoat and changed clothing, 
transferred to another car th«t was waiting for him. He had 
left the gun and the police uniform in the other car. It would 
be got rid of. An hour later he was safely in the mall on 
Long Beach and talking to Michael Corleone. 

Tessio was waiting in the kitchen of the old Don*s house 
and was sipping at a cup of codec when Tom Hagen came 
for him. ‘Mike is ready for you now,* Hagen said. ‘You 
better make your call to Barzini and tell him to start on his 
way.* 

Tessio rose and went to the wall phone. He dialled Barzini’s 
office in New York and said curtly, ‘Wc*rc on our way to 
Brooklyn.’ He hung up and smiled at Hagen. ‘1 hope Mike can 
get us a good deal tonight.* 

Hagen said gravely, ‘I*m sure he will.’ He escorted Tessio 
out of the kitchen and on to the mall. They walked towards 
Michael’s house. At the door they were stopped by one of the 
bodyguards. ‘The boss says he’ll come in a separate car. He 
says for you two to go on ahead.’ 

Tessio frowned and turned to Hagen. ‘Hell, he can’t do 
that; that screws up all my arrangements.* 

At that moment ^ree more bodyguards materialized around 
them. Hagen said gendy, ‘1 can’t go with you either, Tessio.’ 

The ferret-faced caporegime imderstood everything in a flash 
of a second. And accepted it. There was a moment of physical 

456 



weakness^ and then he recovefcd. He said to Hagen, *Tell 
Mike it was business, 1 always liked him/ 

Hagen nodded. *He understands that/ 

Tessio paused for a moment and then said softJy, ‘Tom, can 
you get me off the hook? For old times’ sake?’ 

Hagen shook his head. ‘1 can’t,’ he said. 

He watched Tessio being surrounded by bodyguards and 
led into a waiting car. He felt a little sick. Tessio had been the 
best soldier in the Corleone Family; the old Don had relied 
on him more than any other man with the exception of Luca 
Brasi. It was too bad that so intelligent a man had made such a 
fatal error in judgement so late in life. 

Gurlo Rizxi, still waiting for his interview with Michael, be- 
came jittery with all the arrivals and departures. Obviously 
something big was going on and it looked as if he were going 
to be left out. Impatiently he called Michael on the phone. One 
of the house bodyguards answered, went to get Michael, and 
came back with the message that Michael wanted him to sit 
tight, that he would get to him soon. 

Gu:lo called up his mistress again and told her he was sure 
he would be able to take her to a late supper and spend the 
night. Michael had said he would caU him soon, whatever he 
had planned couldn’t take more than an hour or two. Then it 
would take him about forty minutes to drive to Westbury. It 
could be done. He promised her he would do it and sweet- 
talked her into not being sore. When he bung up he decided 
to get properly dressed so as to save time afterwards. He had 
just slipped into a fresh shirt when there was a knock on the 
door. He reasoned quickly that Mike had tried to get him on 
the phone and had kept getting a busy signal so had simply 
sent a messenger to call him. Carlo went to the door and opened 
it. He felt his whole body go weak with a terrible sickening 
fear. Standing in the doorway was Michael Corleone, his face 
the face of that death Carlo Rizzi saw often in his dreams. 

Behind Michael Corleone were Hagen and Rocco Lampone. 
They looked grave, like pe<^le who had come with the utmost 
reluctance to give a ftiend bad news. The three of them entered 
the house and Carlo Rizzi led them into the living room. 


457 



Recovered from his first shock, he thought that he had suffered 
an attack of nerves. Michael^s words made him really sick, 
physically nauseous. 

‘You have to answer for Santino,’ Michael said. 

Carlo didn’t answer, pretended not to understand. Hagen 
and Lampone had split away to opposite walls of the room. He 
and Michael faced each other. 

‘You fingered Sonny for the Bartini people,’ Michael said, 
his voice flat. ‘That little farce you played out with my. sister, 
did Bar2ini kid you that would fool a Corleone?’ 

Carlo Rizzi spoke out of his terrible fear, without dignity, 
without any kind of pride. ‘I swear I*m innocent. I swear on 
the head of my children I’m innocent. Mike, don’t do this to 
me, please, Mike, don’t do this to me.’ 

Michael said quietly, ‘Barzini is dead. So is Phillip Tattaglia. 
I want to square all the Family accounts tonight. So don’t tell 
me you’re innocent. It would be better for you to admit what 
you did.’ 

Hagen and Lampone stared at Michael with astonishment. 
They were thinking that Michael was not yet the man his 
father was. Why try to get this traitor to admit guilt? That 
guilt was already proven as much as such a thing could be 
proven. The answer was obvious. Michael still was not that 
confident of his right, still feared being unjust, still worried 
about that fraction of an uncertainty that only a confession by 
Carlo Rizzi could erase. 

There was still no answer. Michael said almost kindly, 
‘Don’t be so frightened. Do you think I’d make my sister a 
wi^ow? Do you think I’d make my nephews fatherless? After 
all I’m Godftther to one of your kids. No, your punishment 
will be that you won’t be allowed any work with the Family. 
I’m putting you on a plane to Vegas to join your wife and kids 
and then I want you to stay there. I’ll send Connie an allow- 
ance. That’s all. But don’t keep saying you’re innocent, don’t 
insult my intelligence and make me angry. Who approached 
you, Tattaglia or Barzini?’ 

Carlo Rizzi in his anguished hope for life, in the sweet 
flooding relief that he was not going to be killed, murmured, 
‘Barzini.’ 


438 



*Good, good/ Michael said softly. He beckoned with his 
right hand. ‘ I want you to leave now. There’s a car waiting to 
take you to the airport.’ 

Carlo went out the door first, the other three men very close 
to him. It was night now, but the mall as usual was bright with 
fioodlights. A car pulled up. Carlo saw it was his own car. He 
didn’t recognize the driver. There was someone sitting in the 
back but on the far side. Lampone opened the front door and 
motioned to Carlo to get in. Michael said, 'I’ll call your wife 
and tell her you’re on your way down.’ Carlo got into the car. 
His silk shirt was soaked with sweat. 

The car pulled away, moving swiftly towards the gate. Carlo 
started to turn his head to see if he knew the man sitting behind 
him. At that moment, Clemenza, as cunningly and daintily as a 
little girl slipping a ribbon over the head of a kitten, threw his 
garrotte around Carlo Rizzi’s neck. The smooth rope cut into 
the skin with Clemenza’s powerful yanking throttle. Carlo 
Rizzi’s body went leaping into the air like a fish on a line, but 
Clemenza held him fast, tightening the garrotte until the body 
went slack. Suddenly there was a foul odour in the air of the 
car. Carlo’s body, sphincter released by approaching death, 
had voided itself, Clemenza kept the garrotte tight for another 
few minutes to make sure, then released the rope and put 
it back in his pocket. He relaxed himself against the scat 
cushions as Carlo’s body slumped against the door. After a few 
moments Clemenza rolled the window down to let out the 
stink. 

The victory of the Corleone Family was complete. During 
that same twenty-four-hour period Clemenza and Lampone 
turned loose their re^mes and punished the infiltrators of the 
Corleone domains. Ncri was sent to take command of the 
Tessio regime. Barzini bookmakers were put out of business; 
two of the highest-ranking Barzini enforcers were shot to 
death as they were peaceably picking their teeth over dinner in 
an Italian restaurant on Miilberry Street. A notorious fixer of 
trotting races was also killed as he returned home from a win- 
ning night at the track. Two of the biggest shylocks on the 
waterfront disappeared, to be found months later in the New 
Jersey swamps. 


459 



With this one savage attack, Michael G^rleone made his 
reputation and restored the Corleone Family to its primary 
place in the New York Families. He was respected not only 
for his tactical brilliance but because some of the most im- 
portant caporegimes in both the Barzini and Tattaglia Families 
immediately went over to his side. 

It would have been a perfect triumph for Michael Corleone 
except for an exhibition of hysteria by his sister Connie. 

Connie had flown home with her mother, the children left in 
Vegas. She had restrained her widow’s grief until the limousine 
pulled into the mall. Then, before she could be restrained by 
her mother, she ran across the cobbled street to Michael Cot- 
leone’s house. She burst through the door and found Michael 
and Kay in the living room. Kay started to go to her, to com- 
fort her and take her in her arms in a sisterly embrace but 
stopped short when Connie started screaming at her brother, 
screaming curses and reproaches. ‘You lousy bastard,’ she 
shrieked. ‘You killed my husband. You waited until our father 
died and nobody could stop you and you killed him. You 
killed him. You blamed him about Sonny, you always did, 
everybody did. But you never thought about me. You never 
gave a damn about me. What am I going to do now, what am I 
going to do?’ She was wailing. Two of Michael’s bodyguards 
had come up behind her and were waiting for orders from 
him. But he just stood there impassively and waited for his 
sister to finish. 

Kay said in a shocked voice, ‘Connie, you’re upset, don’t 
say such things.’ 

Connie had recovered from her hysteria. Her voice held a 
deadly venom. ‘Why do you think he was always so cold to 
me? Why do you think he kept Carlo here on the mall? All the 
time he knew he was going to kill my husband. But he didn’t 
dare while my father was alive. My father would have stopped 
him. He knew that. He was just waiting. And then he stood 
Godfather to our child just to throw us ofl* the track. The cold- 
hearted bastard. You think you know your husband? Do you 
know how many men he had killed with my Carlo? Just read 
the papers. Barzini and Tattaglia and the o^ers. My brother 
had them killc^.’ 


440 



She had worked herself into hysteria again. She tried to spit 
in Michael’s face but she had no saliva. 

‘Get her home and get her a doctor/ Michael said. The two 
guards immediately grabbed G>nnie’s arms and pulled her out 
of the house. 

Kay was still shocked, still horrified. She said to her hus- 
band, ‘What made her say all those things, Michael, what 
makes her believe that?* 

Michael shrugged. ‘ She’s hysterical.’ 

Kay looked into his eyes. ‘Michael, it’s not true, please say 
it’s not true.’ 

Michael shook his head wearily. ‘Of course it’s not. Just 
believe me, this one time I’m letting you ask about my affairs, 
and I’m giving you an answer. It is not true.’ He had never 
been more convincing. He looked directly into her eyes. He 
was using all the mutual trust they had built up in their married 
life to make her believe him. And she could not doubt any 
longer. She smiled at him ruefully and came into liis arms for 
a kiss. 

‘We both need a drink,’ she said. She went into the kitchen 
for ice and while there heard the front door open. She went 
out of the kitchen and saw Qemenza, Neri, and Rocco Lam- 
pone come in with the bodyguards. Michael had his back to 
her, but she moved so that she could see him in profile. At that 
moment Clemenaa addressed her husband, greeting him for- 
maUy. 

‘Don Michael,’ Qiemenza said. 

Kay could sec how Michael stood to receive their homage. 
He reminded her of statues in Rome, statues of tl^ose Roman 
emperors of antiquity, who, by divine right, held the power of 
life and death over their fellow men. One hand was on his hip, 
the profile of his face showed a cold proud power, hk body 
was carelessly, arrogantly at ease, weight resting on one foot 
slightly behind the other. The caporeffmes stood before him. 
In that moment Kay knew that everything Connie had accused 
Michael of was true. She went back into the kitchen and wept. 


441 



Book IX 


CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO 


The fi LOODT victory of the Corleone Family was not com- 
plete until a year of delicate political manoeuvring established 
Michael Corleone as the most powerful Family chief in the 
United States. For twelve months, Michael divided his time 
equally between his headquarters at the Long Beach mall and 
his new home in Las Vegas. But at the end of that year he 
decided to close out the New York operation and sell the 
houses and the mall property. For that purpose he brought his 
whole family East on a last visit. They would stay a month, 
wind up business, Kay would do the personal family’s packing 
and shipping of household goods. There were a million other 
minor details. 

Now the Corleone Family was unchallengeable, and Qem- 
enza had his own Family. Rocco Lampone was the Corleone 
faporeffme. In Nevada, Albert Neri was head of all security for 
the Family-controlled hotels. Hagen, too, was part of Michael’s 
Western Family. 

Time helped heal the old wounds. Connie Corleone was 
reconciled to her brother Michael. Indeed not more than a 
week after her terrible accusations she apologized to Michael 
for what she had said and assured Kay t^t there had been no 
tfuth in her words, that it had been only a young widow’s 
hysteria. 

Connie Corleone easily found a new husband; in fact, she 
did not wait the year of respect before filling her bed again 
with a fine young fellow who had come to work for the Cor- 
leone Family as a male secretary. A boy fn>m a reliable Italian 
family but graduated from the top business college in America. 
Naturally his marriage to the sister of the Don made his future 
assured. 

Kay Adams Corleone had delighted her in-laws by taking 


442 



instruction in the Githolic religion and joining that faith. Her 
two boys were also, naturally, being brought up in •‘Hat- 
church, as was required. Michael himself had not been too 
pleased by this development. He would have preferred the 
children to be Protestant, k was more American. 

To her surprise, Kay came to love living m Nevada. She 
loved the scenery, the hills and canyons of garishly red rock, 
the burning deserts, the unexpected and blessedly refreshing 
lakes, even the heat. Her two boys rode their own ponies. She 
had real servants, not bodyguards. And Michael lived a more 
normal life. He owned a construction business ; he joined the 
businessmen's clubs and civic committees; he had a healthy 
interest in local politics without interfering publicly. It was a 
good life. Kay was happy that they were dosing down their 
New York house and that Las Vegas would be truly their 
permanent home. She hated coming back to New York. And 
so on this last trip she had arranged all the packing and shipping 
of goods with the utmost efficiency and speed, and now on 
the final day she felt that same urgency to leave that long- 
time patients feel when it is time to be discharged from the 
hospital. 

On that final day, Kay Adams Corleone woke at dawn. She 
could hear the roar of the truck motors outside on the mall. 
The trucks that would empty all the houses of furniture. The 
Corleone Family would be Hying back to Las Vegas in the 
afternoon, induding Mama Corleone. 

When Kay came out of the bathroom, Michael was propped 
up on his pillow smoking a cigarette. *Why the hell do you 
have to go to church wery morning?^ he said. *1. don’t mind 
Sundays, but why the hell during the week? You’re as bad as 
my motlicr.* He reached over in the darkness and switched on 
the tablelight. 

Kay sat at the edge of the bed to pull up her stockings. * You 
know how converted Catholics are,’ she said. ‘They take it 
more seriously.’ 

Michael reached over to touch her thigh, on the warm skin 
where the top of her nylon hose ended. ‘Don’t,* she said. ‘I’m 
taking Communion this morning.’ 

He didn’t try to hold her when she got up from the bed. He 


445 



said, smiling slightly, *If you’re such a strict Catholic, how come 
you let the kids duck going to church so much?’ 

She felt uncomfortable and she was wary. He was studying 
her with what she thought of privately as his ‘Don’s’ eye. 
‘ They have plenty of time,’ she said. ‘ When we get back home, 
1*11 make them attend more.’ 

She kissed him goodbye before she left. Outside the house 
the air was already getting warm. The summer sun rising in the 
east was red. Kay walked to where her car was parked near the 
gates of the mall. Mama Corleone, dressed in her widow black, 
was already sitting it it, waiting for her. It had become a set 
routine, early Mass, every morning, together. 

Kay kissed the old woman’s wrinkled cheek, then got behind 
the wheel. Mama Corleone asked suspiciously, ‘You eata 
breakfast?’ 

‘No,’ Kay said. 

The old woman nodded her head approvingly. Kay had 
once forgotten that it was forbidden to take food from mid- 
night on before receiving Holy Communion. That had been a 
long time ago, but Mama Corleone never trusted her after that 
and always checked. ‘ You feel all right? ’ the old woman asked. 

‘Yes,’ said Kay. 

The church was small and desolate in the early morning sun- 
light. Its stained-glass windows shielded the interior from heat, 
it would be cool there, a place to rest. Kay helped her mother- 
in-law up the white stone steps and then let her go before her. 
The old woman preferred a pew up front, close to the altar. 
Kay waited on the steps for an extra minute. She was always 
reluctant at this last moment, always a little fearful. 

Tinally she entered the cool darkness. She took the holy 
water on her fingertips and made the sign of the cross, fleet- 
ingly touched her wet fingertips to her parched lips. Gandies 
flickered redly before the saints, the Christ on his cross. Kay 
genuflected before entering her row and then knelt on the 
hard wooden rail of the pew to wait for her call to Communion. 
She bowed her head as if she were praying, but she was not 
quite ready for that. 

It was only here in these dim, vaulted churches that she 



allowed herself to think about her husband’s other life. About 
that terrible night a year ago when he had deliberately used all 
their trust and love in each other to make her believe his lie 
that he had not killed his sister’s husband. 

She had left him because of that lie, not because of the deed. 
The next morning she had taken the children away with her 
to her parents’ house in New Hampshire. Without a word to 
iiT^yone, without really knowing what action she meant to take. 
Niichacl had immediately understood. He had called her the 
first day and then left her alone. It was a week before the 
limousine from New York pulled up in front of her house with 
Tom Hagen. 

She had spent a long terrible afternoon with Tom Hagen, 
the most terrible afternoon of her life. They had gone for a 
walk in the woods outside her little town and Hagen had not 
been gentle. 

Kay had made the mistake of trying to be cruelly flippant, a 
role to which she was not suited. ‘ Did Mike send you up here 
to threaten me?’ she asked. *1 expected to see some of the 
“boys ” get out of the car with their machine guns to make me 
go back.’ 

For the first time since she had known him, she saw Hagen 
angry. He said harshly, * That’s the worst kind of juvenile crap 
I’ve ever heard. I never expected that from a woman like you. 
Come on, Kay.’ 

*A11 right,’ she said. 

They walked along the green coxmtry road. Hagen asked 
quietly, ‘Why did you run away?’ 

Kay said, ‘Because Michael lied to me. Because he made a 
fool of me when he stood Godfather to Connie’s boy. He 
betrayed me. I can’t love a man like that. I can’t live with it. 
I can’t let him be father to my children.’ 

‘I don’t know what you’re talking about,’ Hagen said. 

She turned on him with now-justified rage. ‘I mean that he 
killed his sister’s husband. Do you understand that?’ She 
paused for a moment. ‘And he lied to me.’ 

They walked on for a long time in silence. Finally Hagen 
said, ‘You have no way of really knowing that’s all true. But 
just for the sake of argument let’s assume that it’s true. I’m 


445 



hot saying it is, remember. But what if I gave you what might 
be some justification for what he did. Or rather some possible 
justifications?’ 

Kay looked at him scornfully. * That’s the first time I’ve 
seen the lawyer side of you, Tom. It’s not your best side.* 

Hagen grinned. *OK. Just hear me out. What if Carlo had 
put Sonny on the spot, fingered him. What if Carlo beating up 
Connie that time was a deliberate plot to get Sonny out in the 
open, that they knew he would take the route over the Jones 
Beach Causeway? What if Carlo had been paid to help get 
Sonny killed? Then what?’ 

Kay didn’t answer. Hagen went on. ‘And what if the Don, 
a great man, couldn’t bring himself to do what he had to do, 
avenge his son’s death by killing his daughter’s husband? 
What if that, finally, was too much for him, and he made 
Michael his successor, knowing that Michael would take that 
load off his shoulders, would take that guilt?’ 

‘ It was all over with,’ Kay said, tears springing into her eyes. 
‘ Everybody was happy. Why couldn’t Carlo be forgiven? \^y 
couldn’t everything go on and everybody forget?’ 

She had led across a meadow to a tree~shaded brook. Hagen 
sank down on the grass and sighed. He looked around, sighed 
again and said, ‘In this world you could do it.’ 

Kay said, ‘He’s not the man I married.’ 

Hagen laughed shortly. ‘If he were, he’d be dead now. 
You’d be a widow now. You’d have no problem.’ 

Kay blazed out at him. ‘What the hell does that mean? 
Come on, Tom, speak out straight once in your life. I know 
Michael can’t, but you’re not Sicilian, you can tell a woman the 
truth, you can treat her like an equal, a fellow human being.’ 

There was another long silence. Hagen shook his head. 
‘You’ve got Mike wrong. You’re mad because he lied to you. 
Well, he warned you never to ask him about business. You’re 
mad because he was Godfather to Carlo’s boy. But you made 
him do that. Actually it was the right move for him to make 
if he was going to take action against Carlo. The classical 
tactical move to win the victim’s trust.’ Hagen gave her a 
grim smile. ‘Is that straight enough talk for you?’ But Kay 
had bowed her head. 


446 



Hagen went on. *1^11 give you some more straight talk. 
Afitcr the Don died, Mike was set up to be killed. Do you 
know who set him up? Tessio. So Tessio had to be killed. 
Carlo had to be killed. Because treachery can’t be forgiven. 
Michael could have forgiven it, but people never forgive 
themselves and so they would always be dangerous. Michael 
really liked Tessio. He loves his sister. But he would be shirking 
his duty to you and his children, to his whole family, to me and 
my family, if he let Tessio and Carlo go free. They would have 
been a danger to us all, all our lives.’ 

Kay had been listening to this with tears running down her 
face. ‘Is that what Michael sent you up here to tell me?’ 

Hagen looked at her in genuine surprise. ‘No,’ he said. ‘He 
told me to tell you you could have everything you want and do 
everything you want as long as you take good care of the 
kids.’ Hagen smiled. ‘He said to tell you that you’re his Don. 
That’s just a joke.* 

Kay put her hand on Hagen*s arm. ‘ He didn’t order you to 
tell me all the other things?’ 

Hagen hesitated a moment as if debating whether to tell her 
a final truth. ‘ You still don’t understand,’ he said. ‘If you told 
Michael what I’ve told you today, I’m a dead man.’ He paused 
again. ‘You and the children are the only people on this earth 
he couldn’t harm,’ 

It was a long five minutes after that Kay rose from the grass 
and they started walking back to the house. When they were 
almost there, Kay said to Hagen, ‘After supper, can you drive 
me and the kids to New York in your car?’ 

‘That’s what I came for,* Hagen said. 

A week after she returned to l^chael she went t® a priest for 
instruction to become a Catholic. 

From the innermost recess of the church the bell tolled for 
repentance. As she had been taught to do, Kay struck her 
breast lightly with her clenched hand, the stroke of repentance. 
The bell tolled again and there was the shuffling of feet as the 
communicants left their seats to go to the altar tail. Kay rose 
to join them. She knelt at the altar and ftom the depths of the 
church the bell tolled again. With her dosed hand she struck 


447 



/ber heart once more. 1 he priest was before her. She tilted back 
her head and opened her mouth to receive the papery thin 
wafer. This was the most terrible moment of aU. Until it 
melted away and she could swallow and she could do what she 
came to do. 

Washed clean of sin, a favoured supplicant, she bowed her 
head and folded her hands over the altar rail. She shifted her 
body to make her weight less punishing to her knees. 

She emptied her mind of all thought of herself, of her chil- 
dren, of all anger, of all rebellion, of all questions. Then with 
a profound and deeply willed desire to bdieve, to be heard, as 
she had done every day since the murder of Carlo Ri22i, she 
said the necessary prayers for the soul of Michael Corlconc. 
